You there, Louis?
Hey, Mar. Um, we're still waiting for a couple of people,
but, um, I think the first, um, submitter is here.
Um, and they're via Zoom, so,
um, probably. Okay.
Well, I just need to perhaps, um,
uh, talk with the rest of the committee first.
I think perhaps, how many do you think are going
to be there in person today?
Three. Three Oh members. Three members in person. Yep.
Well, I mean, of the, the minutes
Unsure. Sorry.
I was wondering whether it'd be better for, um, sues
to chair the meetings when there are people in the room
Tried to find you.
I don't need coming into the Zoom now.
Are they on Who we waiting for? Hoo her. Yeah.
Um,
that door
Shut. Hi there.
Hi, Caroline. Good morning Caroline.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
Good morning. It's a bit of a, um, mix this morning of,
uh, members, um, in person and some by Zoom.
So you've got 10 minutes, um,
how you use that time's up to you.
Um, but if you want questions, I'd suggest mm-hmm.
You leave time for those. Sure.
So it's in your hands. Away you go.
Thanks so much for having me.
Um, so, and I'm sorry I'm not there in person.
I feel I should have, um,
but my name is Carolyn Press McKenzie.
I'm the CEO and founder
of New Zealand's leading Independent Animal Welfare
organization who ha, which stands
for helping you help animals.
Um, thank you for having us here today.
So hoo-ha fully supports the closure
of the greyhound racing industry.
For the sake of the animals we under,
we all understand what racing is.
It's a systematic breeding, conditioning
and pushing of animals to their physical limits.
When you apply that level of pressure to any living bean,
whether it be human or animal breakdown, is not accidental.
It's inevitable. Um, I've actually got a script here
that I was going to read,
but I'm also really aware that we'll be one of the agencies
who possibly can do some of the rehoming, um, if,
when this comes into play.
So, if at any point anyone has any questions,
just just jump in
because I think what we have to say is quite important.
Um, we are grateful to you for giving these animals, um,
who love to run the opportunity to do so without pressure
with the new families in their new homes.
For the next few minutes, I'd like to talk to you, um,
and take a constructive and solution forward approach.
Over and over. I hear people, um,
within the racing industry say
that only people within the racing industry
understand greyhounds and what they need.
And only people within the industry should be allowed
to rehome the greyhounds.
But this really worries me, is it blocks support at a time
where the greyhound industry actually needs
that support the most and hoo-ha would
like to offer that support.
Mm-hmm. We, um,
we would love it if everyone would put the habitual
and negative narrative to bed.
We know greyhounds, we love them.
We've been rehoming them for decades.
My first job was in the racing industry working
with standard breeds.
So I've actually, although I've gone on a journey
and now I run a, a rescue, I've actually lived
and breathed racing, and I understand the deep root rooted
passion and culture.
And please know that my experience comes from
firsthand place.
Boots on the ground lived experience.
We've, we've been inside greyhound breeding facilities,
and we've been inside Greyhound training facilities.
We've seen trainers who genuinely care,
and we've also seen the consequences of trainers who do not.
At times, HHA has held up
to 15 greyhounds in our cure at once.
Um, we know that they're quirky.
We know that they're sensitive.
We know that they require patience, routine,
and understanding to,
to transition them successfully into home life.
Every greyhound that has been surrendered to HHA has come
to us for one of two reasons.
Either there was no room at GAP
or, uh, through the GAP program,
or the dog has actually failed the behavioral testing
and refused entry to Gap
or the program despite that of the close to 60 greyhounds
who have found their way to hoo-ha.
And we would love to have had more.
It's just that, you know,
we're not often given the opportunity.
But over the years, we've had 60 or so come through,
and not one of them has been euthanized.
Every single dog has been given the time that's needed
to adjust, and every one of them was successfully rehomed.
Our, our, um, sorry.
Um, I think the big thing is, is that at any stage, we,
we have a contract that goes with every animal we adopt.
And if at any stage a guardian's circumstance change
and they can't care for those animals anymore,
we won't let them give them away or unsell them.
The animals have to be brought back to hoo-ha.
That way we can protect these animals
for their future and for their life.
During one of the industry submissions, we heard one of, um,
one of the speakers talk about the specialist medical here,
our care that greyhounds require.
And on that point, we agree
because in our experience, every greyhound
that has come into our care has needed
substantial medical support.
We routinely see animals with, um,
periodontal disease, needing extensive dental work, um,
panis, which is, uh, autoimmune eye disease.
Um, other conditions. We've had three,
three greyhounds come into our care who have been blind.
Um, we see tail injuries, digit injuries,
pressure source from confinement.
We see, well, most
of them are entire dogs requiring de dissecting.
Some of them have pyometra.
We also see annuals needing orthopedic work.
Um, and they all of course, need significant time patients
and rehabilitation who has a fully
operational veterinary clinic.
And we estimate that each dog,
each greyhound we see requires an average of a thousand
to $1,500 in medical care on arrival.
And this is at cost price.
Um, but what concerns us deep deeply is instead
of working collaboratively
with experience rescue organizations,
the industry has chosen a nar, a narrative
of mistrust and control.
We have experience of this type of control.
Um, we've seen it before where dogs are held tightly,
sometimes hidden, rather than being given opportunity.
For example, we are increasingly
approached by whistleblowers.
And although that's perhaps not relevant anymore
because everyone's chosen a path forward, one
of the most disturbing patterns we have seen is injured
or retired greyhounds being kept in crates, sheds
or garages out of sight.
They're not dead, so the statistics look better,
but they are, they have not been re-homed,
they're just in hiding.
So we're asking what life is that for those greyhounds
through the process to end Greyhound racing Organizations
like hoo-ha SPCA,
who actually deserve much more credit than they're been
given for Caring Dog Watch and other organizations.
Um, we're all capable of helping to, to support
and manage this transition.
And I want to be clear, this is what we do.
We all do this professionally.
Who has, who Ha has 20 staff, a vet team,
obviously a proven track record.
We have the capacity to work with the trainers
and the agencies to relieve the burden
and give these animals a future.
We also have proven track record
for setting up highly functional pop-up shelters, capable
of housing up to a thousand animals every day.
We manage flow, we manage consequences of industry,
and we know how to handle it.
New Zealanders are extraordinary.
And we see, and when these dogs become available,
people will step forward.
I've seen this time
and time again in my 40 years in animal welfare.
This does not need to be a us versus them.
It can be a collaboration, it can be trust, it can be kinder
than what, than what's happening now. One thing,
I'm gonna interrupt you there for a minute.
Uh, that's okay. We're running outta time and I've got,
Oh, go Me a number of questions lined up.
So I could start with you Steve, let
Just do the questions. Yeah.
Brilliant. Thank you. Good one Carolyn.
And thank you so much for your
substantive submission, all your amazing work.
Um, can I interpret from what you're saying
that you don't have a problem, problem
with the existing rehoming groups from the industry side
also doing that work, or you
it should be exclusively hoo-ha save dog watch and SPCA
For me personally, it's all let's
get in there and get amongst it.
Right? I think it would be lovely if,
if everyone understood, um, it'd be nice to set a sort
of like a bar like that.
I think the animals, we do need to do home visits.
We have to really deep dive into who these homes are
and if they have the experience
and if they have the right environment for these animals.
So for us, we probably do get a bit over the top with
how we place an animal, and I'd like to see that rolled out,
but we're all capable of it. Yeah.
So great mates program's all good from your
Point. Yeah, absolutely.
I think we all work together.
Thank you. Um, Rachel?
Yeah, thank you chair. Um, thank you Carolyn.
Um, question I've got is thanks.
Just for the information on the number
of dogs you've re-homed, how many of them have had
to come back into your care, uh, if they've had to be, um,
you know, they've found that it hasn't been suitable
for the house or, um, for the family.
Have you got an idea on that?
Yeah, I think maybe two.
Like honestly, I'm reckoning my brain. There was a situ.
Yeah, I know. We definitely,
I definitely remember one scenario
where the dog needed to come back.
The home wasn't the home we thought it was.
Um, and then that dog got rehomed again to a great home.
And then I think there was a health issue one as well.
But yeah, no, they generally, if you do the job right,
unless there's other circumstances, they stayed,
people love them.
Thanks very much, Caroline.
Um, we, uh, out of time unfortunately,
but, um, thanks very much for taking the effort to submit
and come down in per, uh, and submit in person.
Now. The next um,
submitter is Paul Mitchell from
the Annual Companion Blood Bank,
or sorry, the New Zealand Companion Animal Blood Bank.
And Sues will cheer if that's the case.
Hi Paul, welcome to the primary
Production Select committee.
Um, you can take your submission as read
and as you've probably seen from the previous one,
the more time for questions, the better.
So far away. This alls yours.
Oh, 60 greyhounds over
how many decades did you say was interesting?
Uh, good morning.
I'm Paul Mitchell, owner and director
of the New Zealand Companion Animal Blood Bank.
As you can see, I'm a return serviceman
and veteran as, as it has been in my family
for four generations, father to son.
Um, I'm humbled to have been decorated for my service
to my country and my community.
And I'm a fierce proponent of liberty.
I have no problem standing up or being encountered
or putting myself in harm's way to protect the freedoms
of others as my family has done for generation
to those people who support the bill.
Your right to freedom of speech, freedom of thought
and movement is provided by a Bill of rights
and is protected by thousands of men
and women who, like me and my family.
Believe in your right to liberty, your bill of right.
Our Bill of Rights entitles you to the opportunity
of a vocation of your own choosing.
Many of the supporters of this bill live under the liberty,
and in the same breath, use it as a weapon
to take the liberty away from other New Zealanders.
You have the imper to cajole
and harass New Zealand citizens,
believing you're somehow superior
and claim a moral high ground to belittle and bully.
Your fellow New Zealanders supporters
of this bill are attempting to persuade government
what vocations other people should
and should not be allowed to choose for themselves.
You use the liberty provided to you
to steal away the liberty from your countrymen.
Today I represent myself in New Zealand
companion animal blood bank.
I have a conflict of interest in that my business is related
to the greyhound racing industry.
We are reliant on the industry
and work in symbiosis with it.
If the greyhound racing industry goes,
the breed will go and we will go.
26 years of, of a blood bank will close.
It will be the end of us. Um,
the blood bank produces about a
hundred thousand dollars a year in revenue.
Its profits around the 35% mark.
Um, we've produced, produced over a thousand units of blood
and 2000 units of plasma in the last six years.
A conservative estimate is about a thousand transfusions
given to canine patients that need it
and whose lives have been extended by the existence
of the greyhound racing industry.
We exclusively use greyhounds
and there's good clinical reasons for that.
I'm 49 years old.
I've been outta paid employment
and running my own business for the last eight years.
So I'm wondering what work I'll do.
I'm wondering who will hire me.
I've got two sons, seven and four.
I can't afford to lose $30,000.
I will absolutely lose my home. That's without question.
That's in direct contradiction of what Mr.
Peters' own polls, party policy
and principles suggests that he wants for New Zealanders.
He's gonna take me out of my home.
People are conflating commercial greyhound
and horse racing with injury causation
by the animals owners in the room, which is probably 80%.
Have any of you had an animal experience an injury
that wasn't occurred incurred during a horse
or dog race, living things that sustain injury?
It's a gross simplification to say
that racing is causative of injuries.
Animals get injured
and killed daily, well away from commercial racing.
The government has the right to make laws to do so,
unfettered with the government making decision
and principle industry has put its hope
and the courage of our Governor, general Dame Cindy Kilo.
It's my hope that she challenges convention does not give
this boy this bill Royal Ascent
because it contravenes the intervention, the intention
of laws of New Zealand for its people,
for liberty and sovereignty.
This proposed bill forces the closure
of specifically Greyhound Racing Clubs.
If you've ever been a member of a club,
imagine the government coming
and telling you that you need to close your club down.
This it, the Bill Pro proposes the closure
of a legally trading incorporated society
like the RSA, like SPCA.
And if you let that through,
it's just the thin end of the wedge.
If, if government decides that they can do it better
and says, well, we're just gonna set up an
animal welfare ministry.
It's going, it has, if it passes this legislation,
then it has the power to pass legislation anyway
to seize the, to force the closure
of a legally trading company that's in the,
as a registered organization, seize its funds,
appoint an agency that then chooses the right to
how those funds are then distributed.
And I don't think that that is the liberty that was intended
for New Zealand by our Anzac troops,
by our World War II troops.
Certainly not by my father, not by our Vietnam veterans, not
by my service, not by the service of my son.
I think when you start moving into people's liberties
and choosing what they can and can't do for a job,
I think you'd ask yourself why you sit where you sit.
If you've got any questions for me, go for it.
Thank you very much for your submission
and also thank you very much for your service.
It's very much appreciated.
Um, are there any questions members? Oh, cam, sorry. Yeah,
Thank you Chair. Um, thank
you, Paul. My my question is, uh, in your role,
um, and involved in blood transfusions donations, um,
what sort sort of, have you come across any statistics for
along the lines of in your submission injuries that happen
outside of racing to companion animals?
Is there any database that Oh, that shows the injuries
that you could point the committee to,
Um, the place for data collection?
You would have to go to each individual private clinic
and ask how many patients they see on, on an annual basis.
And that's gonna be variable to community population size,
um, number of clinics in the local.
So, so in other words, you've got, we've got, um,
in-depth statistics for greyhound racing,
but we don't have it for companion animals in the population
or animals used in any other industry.
Um, well, I used to own a clinic in Lavin
and 80 to 90% of the work that came
through the door was public work
that is completely unrelated
to the greyhound racing industry.
So we bought 10% of, of, of some of the Greyhound work
that was in because la where we were based in the VIN foxes
and that sort of stuff, it was a, but 90% of the work
that comes through a vet clinic that came through our,
our vet clinic was vaccinations dog that got caught on,
caught on barbed wire, hit by a car, arbovirus, those types
of all of the other, it's a bell curve.
So the things that happen most often happen most often.
Okay. But, but just to be clear, there's no, there's no
database you'd have to go to every, uh, every, um, local,
uh, clinic to be able to try
and get that data is what you're saying.
It'd be interesting to see
The rate of the rate of injury outside
of racing is exponentially
and probably immeasurably higher than it is within the
racing codes because it's so strongly, strictly regulated.
Um, I've actually got a quick stuff on that
because in relation to the blood, I understand it
that greyhound blood can be used in urgent situations
for any other dog when they require You're exactly right.
Much like humans with oh, negative, which I've got
that can be given to anyone in emergency situation.
Really important. So, so is there an impact
that this is going to have on the future health of dogs?
Absolutely. Absolutely. If, if you consider
that we've given, given maybe a thousand transfusions
to dogs that need it, all
of our dogs are what's called DEA 1.1 negative, which is
as close to a universal donor as you get.
Yeah. So our blood can go to any canine in this country,
and we've done xeno transfusions as well
where there's been lasted effort
where we've given canine blood from a greyhound to a cat
and apparently it runs faster.
Um, look, we've, I, if you can check that up,
it belongs to, um, Sean Johnson of North Shore, um,
critical care and veterinary emergency.
And he's done xeno transfusion just on that, for example.
Um, Sean's invested close to a hundred thousand dollars
for on an apheresis machine, which enables him
to do what's called a treat,
a immune mediated thrombocytopenia, um,
and hemolytic anemia.
Now that's a, if you like, it's kinda like dialysis,
but for dogs and it's close to curative
if he cannot get blood and he cannot get plasma
and we are the only suppliers of blood
and plasma in the country and that sort of volume,
he can't offer that treatment anyway.
So his investment as well as any animals
that he might treat cannot be treated.
That includes all military dogs.
It includes the police dogs that we provide blood for.
We provide blood to Massey University, a RC, every emergency
and after hours clinic in the country that buys blood.
We are the only supplier.
It comes from us and all
of our blood comes from the greyhound
racing industry exclusively.
Thank you very much, Paul.
I'm really sorry, but we've reached time. Sure.
But thank you and thanks again for your service.
You're welcome.
Sorry Steve,
The next submit is via Zoom,
I think. Oh
Yeah.
Hi Kathleen. Sorry.
Um, uh, you can take your, I was just waiting for miles,
but I think he's having problems with the internet service.
Um, you can take your submission as read if you, uh, like
to leave some time for questions.
I'm sure the, um, committee would really appreciate that.
Thank you.
Yes. Good morning. My name is Kathleen Chrisley
and my business is the balanced dog based in Christchurch.
And I'm going to share my perspective on the band from
several angles because I am a pet professional.
I'm a Greyhound mom.
I have volunteered for re-homing efforts,
and I'm also a foster care with a specific
interest in special needs dogs.
Um, I support a ban on greyhound racing on
animal welfare grounds.
And I know that you're being lobbied to return
to the house to stop the ban.
But I believe there is a preponderance
of evidence about injuries
and risks to the dogs from racing
that you simply cannot ignore.
Dogs are not statistics.
They are sentient beings capable of a range of emotions
and with the intelligence of a 2-year-old child.
And so if you accept the 2.52% industry statistic about
injury, I want you to envisage a test.
We will take a small runabout car, say a Suzuki Swift
will remove all its airbags, seat belts,
windows, and windscreens.
And we will place a 2-year-old child
of your choosing in the front passenger seat.
We will then remote control drive it at racing speed in
sharing that that car is bumped, jostled made to roll
and spin, and eventually hit a stationary
object like a wall.
And I would like you to consider that kind
of high intensity injury, assuming the child survives,
what also lifelong injuries they may have if they're once
deemed rehabilitated.
These are the risks that are faced by commercial racing,
and it's a major reason why jurisdictions have banned racing
before us, but also additional jurisdictions
around the world have announced bans since the late
2024 announcement.
But I also see greyhounds who live with injuries
that are not represented in that industry.
Statistic. These are the repetitive strain injuries,
the tendinopathies and the arthritis.
And it is well accepted in the field of canine arthritis.
Management that are arthritis is a young dog's disease.
Its foundations are laid in early in life.
So ligament tears and soft tissue strains incurred in high
energy environments, which may appear to be healed,
are destabilizing.
And I could not appear
before you today without giving voice to some
of the other animal welfare cases.
I have seen the dog surrendered by his trainer, a victim
of mauling in circumstances unknown
his four Legg frozen in scar tissue.
Clearly veterinary care had never been rendered.
And when his adoption surgeon operated on him, she described
that his skin unfurled like a flag to reveal
that he could actually still use his four Legg.
But due to the lack of veterinary care,
he has severe scar tissue that has no elasticity.
These wounds we reopen on a regular basis.
And his adoptive family care for him,
including making special clothing for him so
that he doesn't worry his wounds when they are sore.
I will not speak the trainer's name,
but you'll meet him later
because he appears on your schedule.
For today. The adoptive family who adopted a greyhound
that was classified as failure to thrive.
Her pre-adoption health procedures had all been obeyed,
but eventually the vet said it,
she needed another deworming.
And her worm load was so high that it was indicative
of dogs kept in unclean environments,
in intense living situation
and not the green paddock photos you were shown last week.
My own gr hand socks unwell from the day I adopted him
and grossly underweight regularly wouldn't eat
required painful vitamin B injections
because his vitamin B levels were so low.
And after medications
and ultrasound in various other procedures, he was deemed
to have inflammatory bowel disease.
And I guarantee you he did not develop this disease on the
day he was surrendered for adoption.
He is typical of a dog not represented in the R
to R program, and I can provide you with a copy of my email
to gap on this subjects
because I wanted to talk with them about the implications
of Rehoming an unwell dog,
and my first fostered re pound Rosie.
Kathleen, do you mind if I interrupt?
It's just that we are getting close to time
and I know that, um, Steve Abel has a question for you.
So are you happy to answer, take a question
or did you want to carry on with what you wanted to say?
Well, I, I did time myself,
so I don't believe we're quite at 10 minute, uh,
or even close to 10.
What time? How many minutes do you reckon you have?
About four minutes left.
Okay. Give me just a couple wrap up. Okay.
My foster, my foster greyhound,
Rosie deaf from neglect her ear canals closed
by ear infections and scar tissue.
Now I want a solid rehoming o effort,
and you've previously heard about what it takes
to make a good match,
but we do need to understand
that making a good match needs more skills
than we currently have.
And we need to recognize the rehoming efforts of the people
who have already spoken to you.
'cause I listened to them last week,
but the Department of Internal Affairs has confirmed for me
that no Rehoming plan exists.
And I can share the letter
with you dated the 28th of January.
So I would like you to go back to, um, the house
and make sure that you compel more information about the
Rehoming plan because there are foster homes like mine
that are being underutilized.
And finally, I just want to say that my inquiries to GRNZ
and the Racing Integrity Board about the number
of dogs in the Rehab to Rehome program and the extent
and nature of their injuries have been
met with stony silence.
And these dogs are gonna need special care, um, including
and any, any hands, including my own, that are experienced
that this country can manage.
Thank you, Kathleen. And we have
a question from Steve Abel.
Yeah, thank you so much
Kathleen, and thank you for your work.
Also, um, there seems to be a, a theme that there's
as much injury occurring in companion animals
as there are in Greyhound racing dogs.
Do you have any sort of reflection on that suggestion?
Um, Ebony dog can be subject to an accident
and those, you know, so, and,
and I've concluded the def dictionary definitions of
what an accident is in my submission.
Um, but I can tell you in, in my experience,
and this I'm mentoring my 17th year, the kind of injuries
that I'm seeing as recently as Saturday are dogs
that have had their legs shattered and surgically repaired.
Now yes, they're surgically repaired
and that's a lovely thing,
but that leg is never the same they're going to offload.
And so those high intensity injuries,
we don't see anywhere near that in the pet population.
Okay, thank you. But just like, just like children
and people, anyone can have an injury.
We just don't have an a CC for dogs
that can track that for you.
Thank you. Thank you very much, Kathleen.
We appreciate your time.
Are we at time? Su
Oh, well, if you've got another question,
we've probably got another minute, but there, oh,
Here we Okay. I've got, I've
got one, I've got one other quick one.
Um, it's, it's on the rehoming
that's existing already happening.
Um, most of it is being done by industry associated groups
who are funded by industry.
Um, do you have any issues with that being the pathway
by which Greyhounds would be re-homed once the legislation
passes alongside other groups like HHA and Safe and SBCA?
Mm. I hearken what the lady from hoo ha said.
I think it's an all hands on deck situation. Okay.
And I do recognize, um, the skills
that exist in those rehoming groups
that are affiliated with the industry.
Yep. Um, but there is a bit of a code of silence
when it comes to things like special needs fostering
because we know we have a lot of R to R dogs,
but the offers of fostering are not being met
with, um, in the middle.
And that's a shame for the benefit of the dogs.
Right. Thank you. Thanks very much, Kathleen.
Hi, we
Jennifer Fudge?
Yep. Yep.
Do we have Jennifer? Oh, hi Jennifer.
Welcome to the Select Committee. Can't see you. Please
Turn on my camera.
Oh, could you turn on your camera
and perhaps your Mark Jennifer, please.
Negative ghostwriter. Oh, here we go.
Just need you to turn off your mic.
Turn on your mic, Jennifer, so we can hear you.
But welcome to the primary Production Select committee.
Um, we have you for 10 minutes so far away.
You can take your submission as read
and, um, ideally leave some time
for questions from the members.
Thank you very much. The floor's, yours.
You just need to turn your mic on.
Oh, you just gotta unmute it.
That's it. You've done it. Well done.
Oh, thank you. I'm, I'm sorry.
Um, I'll apologize first, but I'm extremely tired.
Um, that's okay. Two, two nights with parts.
Anyway, I'll explain that in a moment. I'm very concerned.
I'm a trainer and I co-train with Joshua Lane.
Um, I really, really hope that the ban
does not go ahead.
These dogs love to race.
Um, if it goes ahead,
the timeframe I feel is extremely short.
And going into the rehoming, we don't have any idea of
how these dogs are going to be rehomed.
Um, some organizations may be able
to assist the existing ones, some of them, I don't know
personally if I agree that their way of doing it would be
as good as the Reba homing program that currently exists.
Um, I do know with a short period of time, there's going
to be a large number of dogs to Rehome.
Um, I know injuries will go forward, um, in greater numbers.
Those aren't any ones
that aren't in the racing industry,
are not catalyzed anywhere.
The only way often you see them,
and I belong to a lot of groups that are, um,
rehome greyhounds through social media, likes of Facebook.
And on those from around the world, this is,
they often post
and a high one is, is toenails or knocks.
And I wonder if any of, um,
you people have actually witnessed
a true zoomie from a Greyhound.
Um, I'd also, um, have started showing
because going forward I'm very, very concerned that
not just us, but the world will lose the greyhounds.
Um, the U UK Kennel Club have already placed
greyhounds as vulnerable.
There's very few people showing, um, when you show
that's a competitive ring,
and that's entire greyhounds at the moment.
Only trainers are allowed to do that.
Um, I would like
to see someone in the Kennel Club dogs nz be able to, um,
do that with a kennel name.
They, the the rules are, are very strict on
how you go about it.
Um, I've got here,
I don't know if you can see that.
Yes, we can. It's gonna go back out to mum in a minute.
Um, we, that's why, um,
I have had very little sleep for two nights.
Um, it's the first show litter and it's only one puppy.
Um, she absorbed all the others, um, very small uterus
because it had to be a cesarean last night.
And, uh, that takes time for mom to adjust that.
She's actually got a baby.
So, um, it can't be with her at all the times. Um,
I am sorry.
I'm just so passionate about seeing these dogs do
what they love to do, and they do choose the ones
that don't like to race won't be racing.
And that's a few that, um,
are not interested in chasing.
But in centuries that, that greyhounds have lived
there are very high.
Um,
chase, I'm sorry.
Do you have any questions?
No, thank, thank you so much, Jennifer. Thank you.
And we can certainly feel your passion in every,
in the amount of time and effort you've put in
and your genuine concern,
what you mentioned in your submission for the, um,
impact on trainers and their welfare.
So thank you very much for your submission.
Um, members, do we have any questions?
No, Rachel. Okay.
Thank you very much and all the best with your new part
and we appreciate your time in front of the committee today.
Thanks, Jennifer. Thank you, Jennifer.
Thanks. Oh, excellent.
So we've got Maureen. Is Maureen here?
This may be Maureen. No,
Maureen.
Um, is Maureen Hinson here?
Uh, I might just pop out into the hallway
and see if there's one outside.
Shall there's no one on the hallway? Oh, there's no one, no.
We just move on to the next one in a moment.
Does anyone know Maureen or seen her?
We just park and move on the next one.
Yeah, but it'll be ready.
Is the next one on Zoom or on Jonathan? Yeah.
Okay. Was that Jonathan that just moved?
Um, Jonathan. Is Jonathan here? Jonathan.
Jonathan, do you mind if we bring you forward
and then we can see what happens with Maureen?
No problem. Thank you very much.
Can we just close that too so we don't have the
Thanks.
Thanks Jonathan. And welcome.
I'm sure you understand how it goes now,
and as I said, if if you could
leave us some time for questions,
That would be fantastic.
No worries. But the floor is yours. Okay.
Thank you very much. Uh, my name's Jonathan McInerney
and I'm a Grey Un trainer, uh, from Christchurch.
Uh, strongly oppose the bill, uh, for reasons below.
Uh, first of all, I like to talk about that
to Robinson's report that was done in 2021.
I believe that New Zealand Greyhounds, every trainer owner,
has made huge ground to reduce injuries
and euthanasia rates.
I don't believe that we've been judged on our merits over
the last five years, and I would request a
review from the government.
We now have, um, fantastic traceability of all greyhounds
overseen by the RIB, which is a appointed,
which has been appointed by the government to oversee our
industry and make sure that the safety
is upheld to the animals.
These dogs are not forced to race.
They're born bred, raised by dedicated staff
who love the dogs.
If they don't wanna race, they go straight into Rehoming.
It is done by fantastic agencies,
but there is a waiting list.
Currently, I have personally 60 dogs
on the waiting list to find homes.
Some of these dogs have already been on the waiting list
for over a year.
Now, in six months time, you want to end the industry,
you'll have 3000 dogs on the way to how long will this take?
And who will oversee them?
Who will make sure they're safe
and they all go out to forever Homes
personally have a young family.
How do I tell my 9-year-old son that we will now have
to move to Aussie to follow my dreams?
I have a 20-year-old son who's just
started training greyhounds.
The passion that I see in his eyes
is gonna be taken away from him.
Why? Why when we haven't been judged on the
last five years
at a cost to me personally,
I have 275 dogs on my property.
They cost 15,000 per week to look
after to make sure that they're treated well, cared for,
fed, bathed, brushed, and prepared to race.
They're well looked after 10 staff I
have in six months time.
Do they have a job? No one can tell me.
No one can come into my property uplift the 275 dogs
and care for them, knowing what they need when they need it.
They will not have space to run.
When you put 3000 dogs into a kennel,
where are you gonna put them in six months time.
No one can tell me where my dogs will go.
I would just like to take a lot
of questions if you've got them.
So,
Okay, we've got a question from Mike
Butrick. Um, thanks,
um, chair, um, Jonathan,
thank you for your submission.
Um, what's your view on the
conflicting evidence that we get?
And you talk about what's happened in the last five years.
Are you able to talk us through,
you know, what you've seen change
Personally? Like,
okay, so we've got the RIB that will come in
and they'll look at every track before we race.
They'll make sure that it's safe.
They've got measurements to check the track.
If it's unsafe at any point, then they'll make
the track staff bring the track
up to scratch before we race.
So we will not race on an unsafe track.
There is no way that will happen.
I look, we just got, we've got all the data now
that we can just make sure
that these injuries don't happen and we can minimize them.
And we couldn't do that before.
We've made huge ground
and we haven't been judged on, on what we've achieved.
Thank you. Um, we've also got a question from
Cameron Luxon.
Yeah, thank you Chair. Um, hey Jonathan.
My, my question, look, you've got talked about your 200
and, um, 70 plus dogs
and your staff, um, that's all paid for with, um, um,
revenue from the racing industry and profits thereof.
How do you feel about profits that have
previously been earned on betting on overseas races, um,
being used on other sporting codes
and not going to greyhounds?
Yeah, I, I believe if,
if they're gonna take betting from Australia, uh, they, all
that money has to come in to, to care for these dogs,
to find them their homes if the book bill has passed.
But I, I believe that it can, working with the trainers,
we can continue greyhound racing safely.
Underst understood that point.
But also, but just to on the question is, um, help
say when this ban, if this ban was to happen
and you've seen your 275 dogs being uplifted
and your 10 staff put outta work
and yourself looking at going overseas
and taking your, um, family, uh, with you.
I mean, how if that day was to come, come, what sort of,
what do you think trainers would feel, um,
looking at profits being made on other side types
of racing being used to an for another sport
or contributing to another sport?
Uh, I think they would have no words.
Thanks Cameron. I
take it you haven't got another question?
Do any other members have a question? Yeah.
Yeah. Mike Butrick
Please. Thanks, chair.
Um, Jonathan, can you talk about, um,
the investment you've made in terms of, um,
extending kennel sizes
and, you know, the investment you've made in recent years
and what's that look like?
Should this band come to pass?
What's that mean for your investment and your assets?
So we, uh, the RIB implemented policies where we had
to bring our standards, make our standard
dental sizes bigger for comfort, uh, for the Greyhound.
So we spent, hun we spent thousands
and thousands of dollars, uh, redoing vehicles,
redoing kennels, making, uh, yards bigger,
paddocks bigger and all that.
Uh, for basically nothing, uh, is, it is worthless
to anybody that wanted to buy my property.
Yeah. And just as up on that, so in your view,
you've invested all this money, um, in your infrastructure,
should it come to pass that's effectively worth nothing?
That's correct. And, and, and,
and that was from that, uh, 2021 review.
They were all recommendations that we did.
Uh, the RIV uh, followed through with them
and ticked them all off.
And like I say, we spent, uh, thousands
and thousands of dollars all to come up to standard
to make everything safe.
And it was all, it was worthless.
Yeah. Excellent.
Any more questions? Thank you very much, Jonathan.
It was much appreciated. I
Do have a question chair if there was time,
Uh, yes, we have got time.
You can fire away. Cameron,
I've got a question that's been scratching at the back
of my brain and talking to people
or having people talk to me about this ban.
Um, and I so forgive me, Jonathan, on the way
that this question's gonna be phrased.
I've had people tell me that, uh, or, uh, or,
or propose to me that the reason
that a ban on Greyhound racing is happening
and, uh, is that there is a, um, a class element to this
that if it wasn't seen as a working class, um,
poor man's horse sport, uh,
probably wouldn't be getting persecuted.
What do you say to that?
Uh, a hundred percent. Uh, our, um,
monetary value is not there.
Uh, we don't get rich, uh, training greyhounds.
We do it for the, for the love of racing, the love
of the dog and, and the enjoyment that we get out
of seeing them perform for the best of the ability.
Okay, so what I'm hearing for that from that answer is
that's not a unfounded concern of people.
That's right. Yeah. Thank you. Thanks again, Jonathan.
Thank you.
Okay. We now have Maureen Hinson online, so
Hello. Jesus
Christ.
Well, I haven't been called that before. Um,
I'm sorry. We're trying to
get the computer going
and it's, I've, I've lost picture of you,
so hopefully you can hear me.
Yes, we can. Thank you very much. Welcome, Maureen.
Thank you. Hey, you can take your submission as read
and we are delighted to have you with us
and you have, um, got 10 minutes scheduled in,
but if you could allow some time
for questions that would be fantastic. Far away. Perfect.
My name is Maureen Heinen and I live in Christchurch.
I work full-time in a retail job.
Um, I am for stopping the ban against Greyhound racings.
I got involved in Greyhounds about 12 years ago
and my sister-in-law offered me a pet Greyhound,
which we fell in love with
and took home about five years ago.
He died and we got offered another Greyhound,
which we've now still got.
Um, when we were walking the dogs,
I would quite often get asked if Mark was our race dog.
And my comments to that was I would never have any part
of Greyhound racing.
Um, and that was asked on multiple times
over multiple years.
About three to four years ago, I started helping out
with my husband, helping out the sister-in-law with looking
after the dogs, walking them, playing them.
And over the time have learned that
these dogs are absolutely beautiful
and they're well looked after.
Um, two to three years ago start, we started
to help out at the races as well
and saw all the good work that goes in
with looking after these dogs.
Uh, the fe checks, the weights,
making sure the dogs are well up to the fitness
and everything, and if there's any
injuries, they don't start.
Um, I've also seen how the dogs absolutely love going
to the greyhounds and they could be the pet lamb
until you get to the racetrack
and then they're dragging you to get onto the racetrack.
Um, sorry, I'm as nervous there.
No, you're doing great. About two years ago,
we had a third Greyhound decide to adopt us.
She was an older girl, unfortunately,
the first week we had her at home, she found,
saw a cat in the yard, chased it,
smashed into the fence and broke a hawk.
I soon realized they don't just
break their ho on the racetrack.
It happens every day in normal life
and how accidents do happen, unfortunately,
but it's again, getting the care
and love that they need afterwards
around about the same time my husband had had a stroke, um,
one of the things that got him up was having to go
and work these dogs and look
after these dogs on a daily basis.
It made a huge help for him.
Um, and the love of working with the dogs cannot be said.
One of the other things, uh, I've heard a lot of lately is
that, um, the dogs are actually forced to race.
My husband was helping out at the trials on a cold day,
so we had our pet dogs in the car
with the windows down enough for the air to flow through.
Unfortunately, one
of my dogs has heard the dogs racing on the track has
smashed through the window and him
and my older dog had jumped out the window
and made the race to the racetrack to have a race.
Fortunately, both dogs, well, um, talking
to the customers at work, I do do a lot of talking at work.
Um, I soon realized the customers still fought the dog's
greyhounds after they were retired.
If they got injured, the dogs were shot.
I have been up speaking to a lot of people
and said, they actually get re harmed.
They get fit here. That's required.
And the following up are the needs.
Um, my concerns
for the greyhounds going forward if we are banned is there's
a lot of greyhounds out there that need a lot of time,
just their personalities to adjust into harms.
You've got the ones that are blind, things like that.
What is gonna happen to these dogs?
Um, but the biggest one for me is having
to decide which dogs I can keep.
I have currently got three pet greyhounds
and there's another five that if it's retired, I'd like
to take hum, I'm about to retire.
So trying to decide whether
or not to keep working just so I can afford
to keep feet on my dogs and, um, making sure they're looked
after is a big one for me.
Um, the Christchurch Star did a survey last year.
It also said that 73%
of people were in favor for greyhound racing.
I fully support that Greyhound racing.
You go there daily, the love of the dogs,
the love of them going out there.
Yes, there's injuries, but they're working
and like I said, there's injuries every single day
with pet greyhounds, pet dogs, pet cats.
Um, last week my husband stepped up
and got his own trainer's license just
so we can train the two that we do currently have.
And just seeing him going out each day when he is not being
well to go and look after these dogs
and making sure his dogs are well looked
after and cared for.
I think that's it. Hey, I've got the picture.
Thank you. Certainly have. Thank you very much Maureen.
Um, are there any questions from members? Chair?
Oh, sorry, Cameron. Yes, Cameron. Just put my hand up.
Hello. Hello Cameron. Hi Maureen.
Thank you, uh, very much for your submission.
Could look, I see at the top of your submission, um,
it's got Maureen Hiton,
Canterbury GR NZ license holder and Handler.
Yes. Could you tell us what uh, it takes
to become a license holder handler, um,
and what it takes to maintain that,
Um, as all test on a lot of the, um, requirements
that were obviously put forward?
So you understanding of what you've got do with your dogs,
keening them, taking 'em to the races
and keening them, making sure that, um, boxed
I have, I don't do it too often.
My job is just, I love the greyhounds.
Um, if you're going out to the races,
making sure you understand the regulations
and the rules around getting your dogs into the starting
box, following the instructions, um,
and getting your dogs safely back at the end of it.
Um, for me, my license handlers
that's handling the dogs at the races,
I just love handling the dogs, but I don't do it very often.
I prefer to be on the background working
with the dogs at home
and helping out at the racetrack when needed.
Okay. Does that answer the question? Yeah,
Yeah, it does a bit. Um,
I dunno if there's any time
that I was, I had a follow up.
Uh, but, uh, yeah, the follow up then is just, uh,
so you do you, uh, box other, um, like handle other dog, uh,
for other trainers on the, uh, on the track?
Do you see many other dogs
or, I mean, I I notice you say you're mostly
behind the scenes, so you do see
quite a few dogs coming through.
Have you ever, um, had any concerns that you've,
that you've further reported
or have you seen any concerns from interacting
with other dogs from other trainers?
No. Oh, and like I said,
I'm quite a chatter apart from, I'm not nervous.
Um, you can see how much they're loved
and they were well cared for.
And I've been there when one of the dogs unfortunately died
and see the trainer and the handle of that person.
They were devastated and like we all would,
it impacted every single team member that was there.
The whole thing
of it was just horrible and none of us like it.
Um, yeah, I can imagine.
And so, and so that sort of care that you have, that people
that trainers have for their greyhounds, I mean,
how do you think trainers will trust, uh, the agency
that's being set up, um, when it comes to handing over dogs
that it'll be done well?
Do you think trainers have any trust in the system
that's being proposed?
We, I think the issue around a lot of it is
around what's gonna happen to these dogs.
I mean, I've got three that I've had
before, now that I've had myself as pet dogs.
They take a lot of work to get them back into, um, learning
how to climb steps, getting the cars.
A lot of these organizations, are they gonna have the time
to put into these dogs when they,
they're putting down thousands of dogs a year.
Are they gonna have time to get these greyhounds into that?
That's the concerns I think.
I mean, um, multiple greyhounds gotta be put down
because they can't, they haven't got time
and they haven't got the money to put into these dogs
and they all deserve a chance.
Every single one of these greyhounds are
absolutely beautiful dogs.
Some of them just need a lot of time.
Thank you, Maureen.
I've just got a quick question, um, that, that you, I note
that you're requesting additional time
to the legislation pass,
but, um, I was also interested in your comment about, um,
your concerned about dogs falling into the hands
of rogue money hungry organizations like SPCA.
I just wondered where that come up,
That, that may, that may be my sister-in-law's.
She's Oh, I definitely didn't have that in mine.
I didn't have anything about the SPA in my one.
Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Is that it? Yeah,
that's great. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Okay, so I understand we have our next
to submit a Fatima adv.
I hope I've said that correctly. Yeah. Oh, you're here.
That's right. You've done really well.
No, it's okay. I can, I can wait. Yeah. Sorry. Okay.
We are ready to go. Thank you very much. Oh, I'm sorry.
I was waiting for you. Um, I'm one of the directors
of Knight Rev Greyhound's Adoption Agency.
First, I want to thank you
for giving me these precious minutes today
since this bill I was announced this is the very first time
anyone from the government has
been prepared to listen to us.
And I truly appreciate that
I oppose this bill wholeheartedly.
It is based on false and outdated information.
It is hypocritical, it is effectively,
and it effectively sentences an entire breed
of doubt to extinction.
The bill claims to be about welfare,
yet it strips greyhounds
of the exceptional welfare standards they currently receive
under the GRNZ welfare program, a program that protects them
from the time they're born well into retirement.
Let me give you just one example of many.
This is, well,
her racing name is tough treasure.
She was rehomed by us in 2020 to an elderly woman
with a disability where she lived happily
with her mom and their cat.
In August 25, we were contacted
after her owner unexpectedly passed away.
Family members were terrified
that Willow would be euthanized
because now she was nine years old.
I was able to reassure them that this would never happen.
JN Z committed to pay paying all willow's costs no matter
what until she was rehomed.
And that is exactly what happened to be homed her
to another similar lady.
Actually, one month later,
this stock had not been involved in racing for five years,
yet the industry still took full responsibility for her.
This is not an exception. This is the rule.
We may have many such cases in others.
Jasper Pap, who broke his leg at three months old,
he never earned a cent, yet the industry paid $9,000
for his surgery, plus rehoming
and rehab costs on top of that, this is what real welfare
of our greyhounds looks now.
Now compare that to the system.
This bell wants to push Greyhounds into the general
pet in shelter system.
Last year alone, credible source,
which I can send you later,
6,079 dogs were euthanized at Auckland Manary pound alone.
This is one pound in one city,
6,079.
If we extrapolate this nationwide, we are talking about pins
of thousands of dogs.
Non greyhounds easily and
reasons are irresponsible, breeding, neglect,
and overwhelmed shelters, the biggest one of them,
SPCA, refuses to release these euthanasia statistics.
We know this broken system is
where this bill wants our greyhounds to go.
You may recall that legislation banning euthanasia
of greyhounds was stretched through the PA parliament
after the minister's announcements.
What the public was not told is
that this rule had already been in place with gn said
for years, taxpayer money was spent
passing redundant legislation
that painting the industry is likely to euthanize,
greyhounds and mo misleading the public
and vilifying hardworking kiwi community.
Plus the minister calling them sinners after that.
Now they are told that this particular level
that has been in pla that must be placed, um,
that will be repealed.
Ironically, that would be the only time it would actually be
useful to protect greyhounds from being euthanized in
shelters in pounds after closure.
20 years ago, I believed greyhound racing was cruel.
Why? Because like many, well-meaning animal lovers,
I believed activists in social media click bait
that Remi relied on emotion rather than data.
I had privilege to be able to go
and learn myself, to educate myself.
Just for example, as an example,
one persistent life being still being spread is
that slow greyhound, puppies are cu
This is completely false.
It is impossible to know which puppies will succeed.
Often the smallest becomes a champion
and the strongest doesn't do much.
Puppies do not even start training
because they're 1-year-old.
It is a fact. Until then, they grow up
with their mothers and little mates, often
for months longer than pet puppy.
They grow up in packs, not alone with enrichment,
high quality food, constant care.
This upbringing is why they make such calm, balanced,
and loving pets.
They're the way they are
because of the way they were brought up,
because of the job they had.
I have placed thousands
of retired greyhounds into homes in the last 15 years.
And I will put my hand on my heart
and sway to you now the happiest
greyhounds I have ever seen in these 15 years, uh,
at the track just before the race starts.
They love it. They live for it.
And this is the truth. I implore you. Go and see.
You'll be welcome the way I was
and every track in every racing
camp, I will run out of time.
But please think of our dogs,
think of our young people.
Think about this community and do not let the lies
and misinformation.
Sorry, I'm getting emotional.
Go through and when thank you
and please ask me questions.
Of course. Thank you so much
for your very heartfelt submission.
It was fantastic. Um, we have a question from Rachel Boyer.
Uh, thank you Chair. Um, thank you far, uh,
you referenced pounds quite a few,
quite a few times in yours, submission.
Um, I I haven't seen any reference
to pounds in the repo homing plans for the dog.
So I'm just wondering where
you've got that information from.
That council owned pounds are gonna be used for rehoming.
Um, I didn't, but it, this bill
removes all protection of greyhounds.
So theoretically anybody can surrender a greyhound
to the pound after closure if it goes
through just like any dog.
So the but the, the, the plans, so we'll check this
with officials, but my understanding is the plan,
the plan doesn't, no, no, it's not in the plan.
But what the bill does,
it removes protections from the dogs.
Right now trainers cannot put dogs in the pound.
It's, it's not, so people don't
normally surrender dogs to pounds.
They come, they, they, they, they're roaming dogs
that are picked up for pounds.
They often do. If, if the, the, for example,
if the dog is found unregistered,
and if the person doesn't wanna register him,
they give him seven days.
And that's, and that's a, that's a dog that's found roaming
and so that mostly is happening in South Auckland
and Northland, and it's normally mixed breed dogs.
No Greyhound. Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You may have to understand as well that many, um,
councils don't actually publish this data.
Oh, we can get access to it.
Well, Wellington, Tara, we can't. We can't.
Oh, you can under LA you can get access to that information.
So, and we do have, I do have access to information.
Well, we'll know that with officials. Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
But no, it wasn't in the plan. That was not what I meant.
Um, and we have a question from Steve Abel.
Yeah. Thank you for your very impassioned, uh, submission.
Um, do you think there's a bit of a double standard, you run
through the figures on injuries and harness racing
and thoroughbred racing compared to greyhounds.
Do you feel that you are being sort
of unfairly targeted when you look at those statistics?
Absolutely. I'm an electronics engineer by trade
and, you know, I know mathematics and statistics
and it makes no sense.
It absolutely has no sense what, what is going on.
Um, the, the injury rates are much higher
in the codes and even more worryingly.
They don't have such reportings, like
reports like greyhounds do.
Horses are not followed from cradle to grave.
And I know it's morbid,
but where does all the horse make for dog food come from?
We buy hundreds of kilos out.
Anybody in the nery will tell you
it's coming from race horses.
But we don't know because we, they don't have any, uh, well,
they have some small, very dubious reporting
that can't be verified.
So it is a double standard.
It is something that we have to look at.
At the same time, what also is worrying,
and I can send you this letter that we actually got, um, as,
um, as part of the information act, um,
in 2023.
Um, the double light is, so the, the double standard is
so bad that in this letter, which I can send to you all,
um, D-S-P-C-A has emailed the minister saying
that they will not campaign against horse racing.
I mean, but they want greyhounds closed.
I mean, it is astonishing.
There is no, sorry, I'm looking at it is,
and I supposed to look there.
You can look wherever you like. Yeah. So sorry.
Um, this is astonishing. It is insulting.
It is hypocritical
and it makes no sense.
Thank you. I mean, reporting alone, let alone the injuries
and disappearance of many horses.
We don't know where they're, nobody knows.
And let's face it, an average home
theoretically could have a greyhound pet.
Can an average home in Wellington have one?
Like it makes absolutely no sense.
So horses have to be looked into.
A equine coats have to be, if we are going this road,
down this road, they have to be looked at at the same time
and treated accordingly.
Thank you so much for your very, um,
highly emotive and, and passion.
Play it. It's, you can hear it, you feel it in your voice.
It's just I do apologize. No, that don't.
'cause my voice's voice is, it's not about me.
I'm sorry to go over time.
Our young people, they're broken.
They're broken. I don't care about me,
but young people, kids
and young people who coming
into the dentist, they're broken.
They're shadows of themselves.
They're burst into tears when you see them.
And that's why I'm upset. No, sorry. No, no.
Don't apologize. Thank you so much for your time. Thank you.
Thank you for coming.
Okay, so next we've got the Southline,
Southland Greyhounds Racing, and they are on Zoom.
So is that me? Hi Roman.
Hello, how are you?
Very well. Thank you very much for being here today.
Um, you've got 10 minutes.
If you can take your submission as being written
and if you could allow some time
for questions, that would be fantastic.
Hey, thank you. Thank you. Good morning.
My name is Bronwyn Eid and I oppose the bill.
I'm the secretary manager
of the South End Greyhound Racing Club
and the Otago Greyhound Racing Club
and a former public trainer.
And I live just outside of Invercargill.
I've been involved in Greyhound racing for over 47 years.
You could say I'm married into it.
My husband, Mervin, was a Greyhound trainer
and administrator, and three children have never known a
life in the family, home without greyhounds
and all the better for it.
Life with Greyhounds teaches you life skills like patience,
resilience, compassion, routine.
I've seen firsthand
how those skills learned have helped my children
achieve and succeed.
Our start in Greyhound racing was when we imported a b***h
from Australia as a part.
Her name was cheerful, Sheila, and she was very cheerful.
She went on to win many races,
including the New Zealand Star Championship
and produced solid top who won two distant cups
and was second and a third.
His sister, we, Donna Dandy, won the lady's bracelet
and was a small but magnificent b***h.
We also had several stud dogs over the years
and bred many litters.
And there's nothing quite like the achievement of breeding
and producing winners.
Owners and trainers are the backbone
of this wonderful industry.
Life took a turn in late 2009 when my husband passed away.
Suddenly at a time when we all wanted
to do was hide away from the world.
We didn't. We had 13 greyhounds in the backyard to take care
of those dogs.
Got us outta bed and moving forward with purpose.
Couple of highlights
as a trainer I had were training the Ella in the first race
on the new Sound Sand service at Ascot Park,
and training four winners from five starters
with the other dog getting third on the 25th anniversary
of the South and Greyhound Racing Club.
Moving to Escot Park
about four years ago, I gave up training.
I've been the secretary manager of the South
and Greyhound Racing Club for over 16 years.
And more recently, the Otago Greyhound Racing Club.
The Southland Greyhound Racing Club shifted
to Ascot Park in September, 1991.
We had a shoestring budget of around $70,000
to build a new track,
and the infrastructure required the idea
of constructing a big one turn track was raised
a point a difference to the other two South Island tracks
and what a visionary idea that was.
Long straits and a big sweeping bend kinder on the dogs.
I'm proud to say my late father,
a contractor constructed the Greyhound track at Ascot Park
and my late father-in-law.
A brick layer brick lay the blocks
for our original kennel block
and the shift to Ascot Park under a tight budget also saw
volunteer labor from club members.
Without this volunteer labor, the completion
of the track would not have been possible.
In 2007 with the help
of the grant from the cargo licensing trust,
the grass surface was changed to a Red Beach sand
and is one of the safest Greyhound tracks in New Zealand.
The community giving to the club, which enabled the club
to give back to the community.
Ascot Park is the only tri code facility in New Zealand,
and the club currently runs 52 meetings a season 52 payments
of rent to the Ascot Park Consortium
who will lose $115,000 income per season
if the bank goes ahead.
This is vital income for the consortium
and helps to maintain Ascot Park.
The South and Greyhound Racing Club holds one
seat on the consortium.
There is essential services required for a race day
that the club pays for photo finish
and timing, catering, electrician,
phone, internet services.
And then there are a staff who fill the roles on a race day
Allure, driver starter, judge Wang, steward id,
steward Kennel staff, track curator, swaping Steward.
A lot of our employees are retired or on benefits
and the work they do one day a week is vital in helping
with their cost of living.
One of our employees is a school leader who was unable
to find a job, so we've given him a chance,
even though it's only one day a week.
We've also employed two school students over the holidays
to give them a leg into employment.
Further down the track, quite a few
of our employees have been with us for a long time.
They're great people doing a fantastic job.
The negative impact on mental health is of concern.
Not only are these people losing their extra income,
but will lose their weekly social interaction.
I will lose my job and the reality
of this becoming very stressful, trying to find a job
for a person of my age in the area
that I am in this practically impossible
and it's continually playing on my mind.
Greyhounds have been my life.
Then there is the spending power
of the trainers traveling Ascot Park to race.
You stay in motels, spend money on food
and drinks, all adding
to the estimated 8 million per year is independently
analyzed that will disappear from the Southend economy.
Welfare. It's important
to know the race day welfare practices.
They are listed in my written submission,
but it's important to say them again.
Yvette's on course and checks every dog after it's weighed
and before it's kenneled.
The kennel block is two air conditioners
to maintain the area of the correct temperature
to comply with regulations.
Two RIB stu Steward Stewards attend every race meeting,
separate swabbing and kenneling area
animal ambulance on standby, drinking water hoses
and cleaning facilities are provided.
Rules and regulations introduced over the last three
to four years, which have drastically reduced rate.
Race day fatalities and injuries have been ignored.
Limits on the number of starts within a set period.
Weight variation limits field size reduction
to seven dogs for a sprint.
Preferred box draws age restriction
for commencing a racing Korea safe return
to racing trolls from a, from a break from racing.
The club also has a safe fence
around the entire circumference of the track.
The track surface was upgraded just over a year ago,
and a new lure system was installed also.
We installed new starting boxes three years ago
and the club club uses a twin arm.
So many safety features.
A question I have, what is an acceptable level of injuries?
Does it actually list this anywhere?
Has anybody come up with this?
We are told that our injuries are too great.
So what is an acceptable level?
A fertility fatality rate nationwide is half that
of New Zealand thorough and 30% lower than
Australian greyhounds.
So if our levels aren't acceptable,
how can New Zealand s be?
Why will Australian greyhounds still be able to be better?
And it's extremely hypocritical.
All stand downs are recorded in the RIB report
after a race day, no matter how large or small,
but by being totally transparent,
it is used against Greyhound racing.
So in conclusion, the Southland Greyhound Racing Club
and Otago Greyhound Racing Club would like
to see Greyhound racing continue.
But if that's not the case,
the wind down period should be extended to allow the people
who have the full knowledge and expertise
of the Greyhound breed to rehome them.
Club a set have been built up over the years
through the hard work of members
should go towards supporting our people.
Greyhound race in New Zealand should be maintained
to manage the industry's closure process working directly
with clubs and participants.
Why set up another agency at a huge cost to win?
Their expertise is already there.
We can all look at the Greyhound industry from the outside
and find fault, but until you actually take the time
to look on the inside, you won't have a full understanding
to make a call on ending the industry without doing that.
It's just wrong. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Bronwyn.
Look, we've only got about a minute left,
but we've got a couple of questions.
So from Mike Butrick, if you go first
and then quickly. Steve Abel.
Uh, thank you Jude. Thank you Bronwyn for your submission.
Um, are you able to talk us
through any engagement you've had
with the ministerial advisory group?
Absolutely none. Thank you,
Steve. And then we've got
Miles.
I think Miles was ahead
of me if you wanna go with him first.
Okay. I couldn't see him before Miles far away.
Uh, thanks Suze.
Um, Bronwyn, what, what's your understanding of
how the transition agency proposes to
manage, um, the club's and the club's assets?
If this goes ahead,
All I know is that our assets will be seized.
I've had no communication whatsoever, so I'm in the dark.
Okay, thank you.
And, and Mylan Broman is that, um, you, you suggested that
that its a longer timeframe would be more tenable.
Um, I know you're obviously against it,
but if it is gonna be closed, it would be longer.
Do you think there'd be a significance diff difference if it
was an additional year?
Um, obviously people have talking about two years,
but, um, in any amount
of extension preferable from your point of view?
I, no, I put at least a year in my submission,
but I think thinking about it two years would be preferable
because then that would give the time
for New Zealand Greyhounds, um,
and their rehoming agencies to rehome those dogs.
There's been no breeding for round a year, right?
So all those dogs will get a racing career
and move off the other end into the re-homing agencies
and it also means that there is income coming in to do
that from the racing.
Okay, thank you. Um,
Thank you. Sorry Cameron,
we've run outta time for your question.
Thank you so much for your time,
Bronwyn, and for your insights.
It's much appreciated. Um, uh,
we've now got Tony Music waiting to come on Zoom,
so thanks Proman. Thank
You.
Hi, Tony. Welcome to the primary production select
committee where you can take your submission as read
and leave us some time
for questions would be brilliant but far away. Thank
You for the opportunity to speak today.
My name's Tony Music. I'm, uh, for 18 years through to 2022,
I had the privilege of serving as CEO of the, uh,
of New Zealand's largest racing club based at
Addington Raceway.
Uh, prior to that I served as deputy official SIE
and Assistant Registrar of Companies in Christchurch.
My involvement in the Greyhound industry spans back
to the late seventies, during which time I have participated
and observed the industry from, uh, multiple perspectives.
I oppose the proposed ban.
However, if it is indeed the unanimous will of Parliament
to bring Greyhound racing in New Zealand to a close,
then my submission today focuses on ensuring
that such a decision is implemented in a thorough,
a logical fear and responsible way.
My concern is not only
for the participants whose livelihoods will be affected,
but critically for the welfare of the dogs themselves.
A measured transition provides participants
with the time they need to secure alternative employment.
It allows clubs to liquidate their assets in an orderly
fashion, and it gives trainers the opportunity
to make more informed decisions about the future use
of their properties and the lives going forward.
It further allows for fair
and transparent approach to compensation, both for physical,
both for physical
and the differing values of the dogs,
which no one seems to have taken into account.
High value Greyhounds should be allowed
to continue their careers in Australia,
especially if the government hypocritically intends
to continue accept betting on Australian
and English Australian racing.
Should Parliament unfortunately insist on closure.
My proposal, my proposal is that they only close six.
The six circle tracks currently in operation leaving only
the Wonga Nui Straight Track Act
during the transition period.
The straight track significantly reduces the risk
of collisions, risks that are inherent
and far more difficult to mitigate on circular tracks.
In addition, I propose that
we have at least another straight track,
and I'm saying that it's that we,
that we constructed here at Edington Raceway,
rather than the original muted Ashburton,
which we were doing a lot of work on,
Addington already has a necessary infrastructure,
the majority of the Greyhound population,
and the operational capability to support such a facility.
I also know that Addington Raceway would welcome this
opportunity, particularly given the loss
of more than half a million dollars in net income resulting
from the end of Greyhound racing
and the relocation of the Crusaders rugby team
to the new covered stadium.
This approach offers a genuine win-win situation
for the government, the Greyhound participants,
and for those who oppose the sport, it avoids the need
for an abrupt shutdown of an entire industry
and supports an orderly planning, oh,
supports orderly planning, employment opportunity, uh,
sorry, employment continuity, uh, compensation questions,
and responsible asset management across the sector.
It creates a racing environment
that virtually eliminates high impact collisions, which
aligns with the industry's highest prop priority,
which is the protection and welfare of the dogs.
Um, I'm so, I am surprised at the lack
of support from the equine codes.
I sincerely hope this is not driven
by self-serving ambitions or a money grab,
because at this moment the focus should be on fairness,
integrity, and the welfare
of the animals not on competitive advantage.
I listened to those submissions on Thursday and um,
and they were very good submissions.
And then I pick up Friday's paper
and I dunno if you can see this,
but that was a headline on, um,
in Friday's Press Hold it up.
That's it? Yep. That's great. Thank you.
Anyway, the headline says, amazingly, it says,
most backed dog race band select committee
to continue hearing both sides of the argument on Monday
as shut down looms.
I mean, the, just the slanted media reporting is amazing.
You know, like I I listened
to all those submissions on Thursday,
most back dog race band.
What a headline. Ridiculous.
Um, in closing, this proposal represents a practical
and for forward looking solution
that protects the greyhounds,
supports the Greyhound community,
and aligns with expectations of Parliament and the public.
If Greyhound racing is to end later, end in a way
that protects the dogs, respects the people,
and upholds the integrity of the process.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Tony. That was nice, insightful.
We have questions from Cameron Luxton
and then Miles and Steve Abel.
Thank you Chair. Uh, making a quick Tony.
Um, I hope that those other sporting codes
that involve animals
and humans interacting are listening to your submission
because this is a concern.
Um, my question, uh, in regard to your, um,
opening statement, the the incorporated societies, uh, I,
I guess what sort of concerns do you think are relevant
for a committee, uh, of Parliament to take into account
when it comes to the closing of Incorporated society
and the way the process has been handled?
I was hoping with your
background, you'd be able to speak to that.
Wow. I think it's been well reported in the, in the media
and the Greyhound Racing New Zealand submissions, that that
that the reason for closing
and incorporated society is not
what is actually happening in the Greyhound industry.
I mean, it's usually for because of insolvency
or a particular reason or,
or the club wants to wind up for a particular reason.
Not, not for, for why we're sitting here today.
So, so on top of the animal welfare interactions, um,
that other sporting codes should probably be paying
attention to, there is also incorporated Society should be
watching what Parliament is attempting to do here.
A hundred percent. It's, yeah, it's,
it's just plainly wrong.
Thank you. Yes.
And next we have Steve.
Yeah, thank you Tony.
Um, can you please provide us some notes?
'cause I think you made some really solid points
and what you, uh, read out to us.
Um, the point you make about keeping the straight tracks
only open for a period would allow
the time you say is beneficial
to making it a more acceptable prospect, um,
even though obviously you're opposed to it.
But is is that, do I understand that correctly?
Yeah, don't get me wrong, I don't want any of them
to close, but no, I mean, I understand if, if we, you know,
if we get to that situation,
dogs running in straight lines are safer than dogs running
around one beam track or dogs running around two beam track.
It's just, you know, like, it's just logic, um,
to allow them to race up the straight
without, you know, the necessary.
It'll still be the odd injury, but,
but you know, dogs running in a straight line as opposed
to going 70 kilometers an hour round a bend clearly is going
to be less, you know, less, less impact on, on the, the,
the sit the state of injuries, um,
we've already got the one at Whanganui, it's
demonstrably safer.
Um, and yeah, here at Eddington Raceway, uh,
there would be room for, uh, a straight track.
Uh, I'm not against one at Ash Burton or anything like that.
The reason we didn't go there in the first place is, is
because of the earthquakes.
We thought we needed a second option just in case, um,
Edington was either sold or in the case
of an earthquake, where would we go?
So that's why we were looking at Ash Burton at the time.
We actually looked at QE two park at 1.2 going
back quite a few years.
So, so, so my submission is if it's gonna close,
keep the tracks straight, two straight tracks going,
let the let the dogs run out their racing careers,
sort out the breeding side of it
through Greyhound racing New Zealand.
Um, and, and it's a win-win for everyone.
And, and the other thing I said, you know,
allow the high value greyhounds,
no one's talked about high value greyhounds, some
of these dogs are worth 20 or $30,000
and they're being just treated as if they're gonna be a
pet from the 1st of August.
Um, let them go to Australia.
It solves it, it solves a government's problem. Yeah.
If, if we send a hundred dogs to Australia's a hundred less
to Rehome, it's just common sense.
Thank you. Thanks Tony. And we've just got a
very quick question from Miles.
Yeah, good day, Tony. Long time. No, see, um,
Yeah, I thought, I thought,
I thought I used to work with you.
I couldn't remember the name of Yeah. How I, um,
Look, uh, can you think of any other precedent where, uh,
the government has shut down legally operating, um,
incorporated societies and taken their assets?
Oh, the odd charitable trust that dealt
with drugs in the lot,
but no logically, no, I mean, this is, you know, this is,
this is weird, but yeah.
A legally operating incorporated society
or charitable trust is, you know, there's no, there's,
I don't think you'd be struggling
to find a precedent other than, you know, committing,
committing some sort. Yeah. Yeah.
Yep. Thank you. Thank
you very much for the opportunity.
Thank you very much, Tony. Thank
You.
Right, ladies. And do you know when we now have a
break for nine minutes,
Could we just, um, do some formal
Yes. I'll hand it over to
you miles quickly before the break.
Right. Sorry. Um, I've had all sorts of issues with my
internet down here in my office.
Parliamentary security mandated some work
and it seems to have stuffed things up, so I'd like to move
that Sue's chair the entire committee
meeting for the rest of the day.
Yep, that's fine. That's fine. Yep. Good. Thank you.
Thanks, miles. Sorry. Your dramas bug for you. Okay.
We'll see everyone back here at
10, 10 40, is that right?
Yeah, see them,
we're back.
Um, we have now got Alicia
Washington on Zoom.
Hi, Alicia. You have 10 minutes before the
Leah. Oh.
Oh, Leah, so, oh, sorry. Yes. I didn't put my glasses.
That's okay. It's Sorry about that.
Right. You have 10 minutes.
Thank you. Hi, my name is Leah Washington.
I'm 20 years old and I oppose the ban.
I apologize if I don't get
through all of this without tears.
I have grown up with the dogs from a very young age.
I don't know, life without the greyhounds.
To me, they're family and not just dogs.
I left school quite
done due to bullying.
And the only thing that keep me here today is the Greyhound.
You're right. Keep going. Deep breath.
You're doing great. Leah. When the ban was announced,
I was alone and making dinners for all of our dogs
while my parents were racing eight hours away.
I felt like I had just been told I only had 18 months left
to live, 18 months to achieve my biggest dreams
and 18 months to lose everything.
And everyone I walked out of our food room
and looked at all the beautiful, you are fine.
You're right. Yeah. And looked at all the beautiful faces
looking back at me
and realized it wasn't just my dreams, it was theirs.
Two, alongside my family
and friends, I recently become a trainer of
to 10 beautiful greyhounds, as I said in my submission
that are kids and mean the world to me.
I'm not here today to bring forward facts and figures.
I'm here to show you how this is affecting the youth
of the greyhound racing industry.
We have dedicated our lives
to these beautiful dogs at such a young age.
And I personally,
and I know many others feel this way too,
feel like we don't have a future without our dogs
or a future in this country if this band is to go through.
I've witnessed the decline in the mental wellbeing
of my peers at the track.
I know myself, I'm struggling,
and the only reason I'm able
to get outta bed in the morning is for my dogs.
I know, I know myself.
I feel like I'm on a rollercoaster one minute.
I'm so angry and frustrated, angry for not being able
to be heard, to get our voices across,
frustrated at the lack of education into this decision.
But mostly, but most of all, it's the sadness and grief.
There's not a day I can't hold the tears back in despair,
and I have to deal with the overwhelming grief,
knowing I'm soon to be losing my little family
and being forced to live a life without them there,
which is all I've ever known.
I believe I don't have the qualifications to be able
to put myself out in the current workforce
that are struggling to provide adequate jobs
for the youth in this country.
As is I've dedicated myself
for a future in greyhound racing,
and I now face an uncertain future.
This is a reflection on how the majority
of the youth in the industry feel.
I've been lucky enough to be a part
of many greyhound's lives from the second they're born
to their first run on the track
to helping them find their forever homes.
People say they're forced to run,
but there's no forcing such beauty.
They're born to run. Our top priority is our greyhounds.
They always come first no matter what,
which sometimes means missing out on
family functions and outings.
We're always making sure they're
getting the best of the best.
I worry about my future,
but I mostly worry for the safety
of our dogs when they are no longer in our care
and are moved into rehoming facilities
that aren't experienced
or understand their individual needs and personalities.
Our dogs should remain, should remain
with GD Rehoming groups.
I oppose the ban completely,
but if it was to go through,
I believe there should be some sort of wind down period
of five years and some sort of education or opportunities
and future guidance offered to the youth
and a stronger structure
of mental health support made available.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Leah.
Um, we have a question from Cameron Luxton.
Um, thank you very much Leah for your submission, um,
your heartfelt view from a young person, uh,
trying to enter an industry.
Have you, uh, had a chance to speak to, um,
other young people entering other industries
that are involved with, um, animal human interactions?
Or have you had anybody reach out to you from other, um,
codes or industries?
Um, offering support.
I've had support from my family and through JRNZ,
but I haven't had support from any other codes.
Okay. And from the first part of my question,
have you reached out to any young people involved in, um,
sports or industries that involve, um, animals
and humans interaction?
Um, so young farmers or anything?
Have you reached out to anybody and,
and talked about what's happening to your industry?
Uh, yes. Yes. It's fine if you don't want to,
but would you mind expanding on that?
I, I, I don't really know what to say. Sorry. That's
Fine.
Yeah. Um, okay, Leah,
we've got a question from Mike Butrick,
Uh, thank you chair.
Uh, thank you Leah, for your very, um, heartfelt submission.
Um, question for you. You've been involved in the, um,
industry for three years, I think, is it? Um,
Uh, since I was four years old.
Yeah, sorry. But, um, uh, have you,
what changes have you seen?
Um, in terms of how the animals are cared for and,
and, you know, rules and around racing and injuries
and things like that In recent times?
It, it's all I've even known. Um, I've seen change.
I haven't seen, I don't know
what the greyhound racing world used
to look like when I was a baby.
Um, but I've known, all I've known is high standards
and quality here.
That that's all we do.
Yeah. Thank you. Um, thank you.
And Steve, did you have a question?
No, I'm all good. I think it was covered.
And just to say powerful submission.
Um, Leah, and thank you so much.
Thank you very much for your time, Leah.
And as Steve's reiterated you a heartfelt
submission, that was very powerful.
Thank you.
Thank you. Um,
is we now move on to Craig Roberts.
Is Craig here?
Yes, I am. Oh, okay. We
Just, we've done a, we've done a swapping,
swapping of the seats,
But wait is more, That one was, yeah,
that one was fairly hard to listen to actually.
Um, being there's father,
but, uh, anyway, my name is, uh, Craig Roberts.
I've been involved in Greyhound racing for 44 years.
I've served on the and Greyhound Racing Club
as committee member and as a president.
I've served on the Christchurch Greyhound Racing
Club as a board member.
I've previously served on the GRNZ board as a board member,
and I'm currently serving
as a board member on the GRNZ board.
I'm involved in all three codes.
Um, greyhounds, I, I've been lucky enough, uh, that,
you know, that's turned into an
income for me over the years.
Uh, and, and I, I own, um,
Standardbreds and Thoroughbreds.
I've bred a thoroughbred fo, she's out in the paddock now.
I've also bred standard breds
and I race, uh, standard breeds as well.
So why, while I make my income from Greyhound racing,
I have no bias towards the other two coves,
but I will speak about the hypocrisy, uh,
regarding the other two codes
and greyhound racing a bit later.
My involvement in the industry is not just me.
It involves my whole family.
My eldest daughter's partner is a track curator at the
Christchurch Greyhound Racing Club.
My two sons are both trainers in their own right.
My youngest son trains out of my property.
My stepdaughter is a trainer who had just met, uh, in Leah.
Um, my stepdaughter's partner is a track curator
at Ton Raceway.
My oldest son's partner is the CEO
of Christchurch Greyhound Racing Club.
And even my ex-wife is also employed
by the Christchurch Greyhound Racing Club.
So this band will not only affects, uh, me,
but it affects my whole family dynamic
and the way, the way of that we live, we all live close
to each other and, um, we, we all see a lot of each other.
And if this band goes ahead, then that's all going
to change, uh,
because we will have to, you know,
possibly move away from each other,
find other jobs if we can, uh,
which isn't easy in this current climate.
So, um, this, this, this, this.
I mean, I'm just one family
that there's gonna be other families torn apart by this too.
If it comes into, uh, if it comes into being
the, the, the annoying things for me a about this,
the whole process ha has been that, uh, we have never once,
uh, had any form of communication from Winston Peters.
Uh, we have tried on several occasions,
and I'm speaking as a board member,
G RM Z has tried on several occasions
to have meetings with him.
They have written to him,
and not once have we ever had a communication,
even a communication from him.
So we were sending a lot of information on a,
on a monthly basis.
And we, I'm, I personally,
I'm now left wondering if this information
was e has even been read.
The, I I'm,
I'm really other thing that is really upsetting is the,
is the treatment that as a Greyhound enthusiast, we,
we've been given, um, we've had to endure a lot of, uh,
rubbish through social media.
Uh, we've had to endure a lot of rubbish through, um,
mainstream media.
And it's just, it's not on, I, I'm, I'm, I'm, I was proud
to be a Kiwi and,
and now I'm just wondering, is New Zealand the right place
for me to be in because, um, people can have an opinion
and, and based on an opinion they can
affect your whole life, uh, which
is just absolutely ridiculous that this sort
of thing can happen in this day and age.
The, the other two codes have alienated us, um,
which is very disappointing from my point of view
because I, as I say, I'm involved in, in both codes.
I've even had, I've even written emails to the CEO
of harness racing New Zealand, uh,
expressing my disgust at how we've been treated.
I'm wondering that the other two codes only see this
as a financial windfall for them, uh, hoping
that the 42,000 Greyhound races
that will be beamed in from Australia will be a
financial windfall for them.
And if the ban was to go ahead,
that would be absolutely ludicrous for Greyhound races
to be shown on New Zealand TV screens when it's been banned
for supposedly, uh, welfare problems.
The, the injuries, um, you know, the injuries,
the antis, they, they, they love talking about injuries.
20 years ago when they first started attacking us,
the antis were only worried about euthanasia.
We fix that, we fix, we fix the euthanasia.
The, the, the sensitive euthanasia is minute,
uh, in Greyhound racing.
Now we, we, so, so now they've gone on to injuries,
and we are, I believe we are not too transparent,
but we go over beyond and above explaining injuries.
We have a, we have injury categories, A, B, C, D, and F.
The, the largest percentage,
and I, I just haven't got the figure in front of me,
but it would be over 50%
of recorded injuries are the one
to 10 day stand down period.
90% of the are not even injuries.
They are suspicions from the OnCourse vet
after vetting a dog that has, has taken a knock on the race
or whatever, can't find an injury,
but puts them on a stand down just
as a precautionary measure.
So also a trainer can scratch a dog from a race meeting
and receive an automatic 10 day standout.
So they are recorded as injuries.
So that is a massive number.
When, when, when people talk about the ground injuries and,
and that over 50% of them are basically not even an injury,
or if they are, they're that minor
that the dog is prevented from racing for seven to 10 days.
So the,
the, the, you know, the injuries, sorry.
No, no. Carry on. I, I thought you'd finished, Craig,
and we do have a few questions for you, so if you wanted
to wrap it up, that be Okay.
Well, very helpful. I'll wrap it up with one last thing.
At the time of the announcement of the ban, uh,
Greyhound Racing New Zealand was in the final processes
of developing a track, a straight track at Ashburton,
which would also incorporate a one turn track.
We were at the start stages, we had track designs done,
we were ready to start tendering, uh, for the job to be,
to be started right at the time that, uh,
Winston Peters announced the band.
So there would've been another straight track
and a one turn track operating in as Burton
by now if this band wasn't announced.
Thank you very much, Craig.
Um, we have a question from Mike Buttrick.
Uh, thank you chair. Thank you,
Craig, for your submission.
Um, I just note, you know, we've,
you talked about your infrastructure,
what you've invested in your, you know,
your fixed assets over time.
I, we probably haven't, um, talked much about the, the value
of your dogs and what that means.
Should this come to pass? You know, I'm, I'm assuming
that dogs will be, have very high value
and, um, what's that look like if it does come to pass
and in terms of the impact on you
and your family and your business?
Well, I, I, I'm, I've been lucky enough to train for a,
um, a world class breeder from Australia.
So I have some highly valuable, uh, greyhounds in my,
you know, and, and my kennels.
So how do you value, how do you value a greyhound
that can't race anymore?
Um, it's, it's just, uh, it's a,
it's a bit of abar really.
They, they, you know,
do you value them on their potential future earnings?
Um, do deval devalue them on what they've already earned?
Uh, it's just, it's a nightmare trying to work that out.
Have, have you got some indicative values of, you know,
what a, what a greyhound is worth a good
racing gr greyhound.
Oh, a, a good racing greyhound in New Zealand would be,
oh, I know people have paid 40, $50,000 for a,
a top line Greyhound in New Zealand.
Yeah. Okay. Thank you. So, Uh, you know,
Yeah, thanks Greg.
Um, miles and Cameron,
you both had your hands up previously.
Have you, do you have questions?
No, no, that's, uh, thanks, Sue.
The, the submitter covered perfectly what, uh,
I was going to question them about.
Excellent. Oh, well thank you
very much for your time, Craig.
Okay, excellent. Thanks very much.
You're welcome. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Okay, now I understand we've got
Greyhound's Australia, Simon.
Yes. Welcome. Thank you.
I think you know the drill by now, but thank you.
Oh, Australasia, sorry.
Good morning, chair and members of the committee.
Uh, my name is Simon Stout
and as Chief Executive of Greyhounds Australasia, I'm here
before you today for those unfamiliar with our organization.
Greyhounds Australasia is the peak coordinating body
for greyhound racing control bodies
and regulators across Australia and New Zealand.
We're also the official custodian of the Australian
and New Zealand Greyhound stud book,
originally established in 1937.
We represent eight independent jurisdictional industry
control authorities across our region,
including Greyhound Racing New Zealand.
We appreciate the opportunity to present to you today
about the greyhound, about the closure bill.
As the peak body GA has the responsibility to speak plainly,
when decisions affecting the integrity, sustainability,
and welfare outcomes
of the industry depart from accepted
standards in good governance.
The proposed closure of greyhound racing in New Zealand
is not simply a policy decision about one racing code.
It is a test of whether major regulatory change
will be driven by evidence, proportionality,
and fair process or by predetermination.
The outcome will have lasting implications for participants,
greyhounds, regional communities,
and for how governments engage
with longstanding regulated industries that have
demonstrated their capacity to reform.
Allow me to be direct greyhound's Australasia is
fundamentally opposed to the closure
of greyhound raising in New Zealand.
This opposition is based on three underlying concerns
that I will address today.
First, procedural unfairness.
The decision to close the industry was made without
meaningful consultation with the industry itself,
without transparency around the data relied upon
and without affording participants
or regulators the o opportunity to respond to test
or improve against the benchmarks said
to justify the closure.
According to the briefing documents released
by the government throughout 2024, the Department
of Internal Affairs provided internal briefings
to the minister consistently within these formal briefings.
The DIA reiterated the need for stakeholder engagement.
Yet this engagement was bereft of any formal
or informal meetings by the minister with GRNZ
or associated Greyhound racing stakeholders
within the DIA briefings.
Three options were presented critically,
these options were developed without one essential option
being explored, continuation of the industry under current
or increased legislation
with alternate operating conditions.
From the time of the announcement,
GHAA has submitted three written requests for meetings
with Minister Peters, all of which have been rejected.
We were directed to engage
with the ministerial advisory Committee instead.
However, from the outset of that engagement with the Mac,
all stakeholders were informed that in line with the terms
of reference, the MAC was focused solely on the transition
to closure, not on whether closure was justified.
The regulatory impact statement
for the bill relies upon broad assertions,
incomplete comparisons and untested assumptions.
It does not provide a sufficiently robust
or balanced foundation to support closure.
Indeed, the DIA's own disclosure statement acknowledges
that no stakeholder organizations were consulted on the
specific proposals of this bill.
The absence of procedural fairness is carried
through into the drafting of the bill
and the transition framework.
Now, before parliament, we implore the select committee
to permit the procedural fairness that has been lacking
and provide greyhound industry stakeholders with a balanced
evidence-based platform to challenge this decision.
Second, the evidence does not support closure.
Allow me to address the welfare evidence directly
because it is central to the government's decision.
The New Zealand Greyhound industry's commitment
to welfare is second to none evidence
that this is the commitment to its nature
and breadth of its race and reporting
with greyhound administrators
and regulators providing the most comprehensive veterinary
reporting of any animal industry.
Greyhound racing records
and publishes all post-race veterinary observations from the
smallest scratch, bruise, abrasion,
or cup through to major injury requiring significant
veterinary intervention, or in rare cases, euthanasia.
Since the Hanson and Robinson reviews in 2017
and 2021 respectively,
the New Zealand Greyhound industry has delivered
substantial, measurable
and independently verified improvements in
greyhound welfare outcomes.
Ray State fatalities have reduced by 62% since 2020.
Overall mortality rates have dropped by 70%.
Unnecessary euthanasia has been eradicated.
Injury rates have declined significantly
across all classifications.
These aren't just numbers.
They represent real systematic change driven by continued
and meaningful reforms.
The Racing Integrity Board
as the independent oversight body, has consistently found
that injury controls and reporting systems are adequate
and aligned with best practice.
International animal welfare experts have confirmed
that New Zealand's framework reflects contemporary
science-based welfare principles.
Most significantly major safety initiatives were continuing
to deliver results when the closure decision was made.
The WWI start track, for example,
commenced operation in July, 2024.
The data from this facility shows
that injury rates at a SU substantially lower than other
New Zealand tracks, and in some categories the reduction is
over 60% with zero fatalities recorded.
Additional straight track development was planned,
but not given sufficient time
or weight in the government's decision making process.
This is not a failing industry.
This was an industry on a demonstrable pathway
of improvement that was denied the opportunity
to continue that journey.
GA does not argue that improvement was complete
or that reform reform was no longer required.
What we do say is that ba,
the available evidence does not support the conclusion
that the closure was the only viable outcome,
nor that the industry was unwilling
or incapable to meet further welfare expectations if given
the opportunity to do so.
Thirdly, a question fairness under the proposed bill,
new Zealanders will continue
to wager on greyhound racing conducted overseas
under regulatory frameworks
comparable to those in New Zealand.
GA supports the government's plan to continue wagering.
There is obviously a fundamental inconsistency.
Accordingly, we post the question,
given international greyhound racing is acceptable
for New Zealanders to wage upon basic fairness, demands
that the New Zealand industry be afforded the opportunity
to operate under equivalent or improve circumstances.
The government cited an injury benchmark, but
provided no transparency about why it was selected,
sought no engagement about its context
or how it was derived.
No discussion with the industry about
how it could be achieved, and no opportunity to demonstrate
that the remaining gap was both achievable
and already narrowing.
That's not evidence-based policy. That's predetermination.
The human and economic consequences of closure have
likewise been understated.
The New Zealand Greyhound racing industry supports more than
a thousand full-time equivalent jobs.
Many in regional communities
with multiple multi-generational family enterprises.
These are lawful livelihoods underpinned
by private investment and volunteer effort.
While the bill's regulatory impact statement acknowledges
these impacts, it concedes that meaningful consultation
with stakeholders did not occur.
As a result, the bill does not readily
or fairly provide for the physical, emotional,
or financial support necessary to support these livelihoods,
their families, and their
communities fair.
If the committee determines
that closure is unavoidable despite our submissions,
then fairness must govern the transition.
The current bill does not meet that standard.
If closure will ultimately proceed,
the current legislative framework raises serious concerns,
including the proposed dissolution of GRNZ, the transfer
of its functions to a new agency, limited transition detail,
and the treatment of industry and club assets.
Together, these elements create real risks
to greyhound welfare, regulatory continuity,
and participant wellbeing.
Specifically, we submit
that any transition must include an extended
and properly sequence transition period to avoid an
manageable burden on re-homing systems retention
of grn Z's operational expertise systems
and stakeholder trust during transition.
Under the agency's oversight ring fencing
of wagering revenues from betting on overseas greyhound
racing to fund transition costs, re-homing obligations
and participant support, fair
and reasonable for financial support
for affected participants, not as mere compensation,
but as recognition of lawful investment
and livelihoods being extinguished by the statute
protection of industry
and club assets to support the people in
greyhounds that created them.
And a legislated long-term welfare safety net
for greyhounds, including return arrangements,
specialist re-homing oversight
and emergency veterinary support.
Greyhounds Australasia respectfully recommends
that the committee reject the bill
and require a fair evidence-based process
that allows the industry to present
and implement its amended safety focused racing model,
including expanded use of its straight track
and continued independent oversight.
If closure must proceed,
proceed substantially amend the bill
to ensure the protections
and fairness, the measures that we have outlined.
Members of the committee, this matter extends
beyond the future of single racing code.
It raises fundamental questions about procedural fairness,
proportionality, and the treatment
of regulated industries in New Zealand.
Can a longstanding regulated industry be dismantled without
due process, without being,
being given a genuine opportunity to demonstrate improvement
and without fair treatment of those
who have invested lawfully in it?
We don't believe that's consistent
with New Zealand's reputation
for principled governments and natural justice. This,
Hey, I'm really sorry,
but I'm gonna have to stop you there, Simon.
Thank you. 'cause we've reached time
and, um, but thank you very much.
Thank you very much for your submission
and thanks very much for taking time to appear today.
Thank you. Um,
we now have the Racing Integrity Board via Zoom
for 10 minutes over here.
Oh, you here? Oh, okay.
Oh, go by Zoom.
Sorry. Um,
Hi, welcome.
Thank you very much. Good morning
and thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Elliot Forbes
and I'm the Chief Executive of the Racing Integrity Board,
often referred to as the RIB.
I'm a qualified veterinary surgeon
and I've worked in racing administration for over 25 years.
I'm joined today by Martin Burns, our Executive Manager
of Strategy and Relations.
I have a three, a short three minute statement,
and then I'm pleased to answer any questions.
The RIB is the independent regulator
of racing in New Zealand, and our objectives
and functions are outlined in sections 43
and 44 off the Racing Act.
Our core functions include stewarding, investigations,
drug testing, adjudication, wagering integrity,
and monitoring the welfare of racing animals
following a ministerial direction.
In 2023, we've been monitoring the performance
of Greyhound Racing New Zealand, or GRNZ, um,
and we produce a quarterly report, which is
provided to the minister and it's published online.
This provides independent verification
of Greyhound injury data and retirement data.
So our submission is focus on ensuring
that any integrity matters arising
before the 1st of August, 2026 can be completed fairly
and lawfully in accordance
with our statutory responsibilities.
So the RIB derives its rec rectory powers under the GRNZ
rules of racing that apply to license personnel.
Now, as drafted, the bill would discontinue the GRNZ rules
and the licensing framework at the time the industry closes.
Hence, the R IBS powers
and jurisdiction will end on the 31st of July, 2026.
So our recommendation is for an amendment
that would enable the GNZ rules
and the RI b's powers to be maintained for a period
of six months following the date of closure.
So this is important
because integrity matters such as investigations, hearings,
appeals that might already be underway
or that may arise shortly before closure would
otherwise be unable to be completed.
So, for example, laboratory testing
of samples collected from racing dogs usually takes about
two weeks to analyze.
So a positive drug test in late July would not be available
until after the 1st of August.
So without a transitional jurisdiction,
the RIB could not investigate lay charges
or disqualify the greyhound.
So this creates a rectory risk in the system
that could be exploited, which would undermine integrity
and animal welfare, and could also lead through unfairness
for the majority of the Greyhound participants
that would continue to act
with high standards of professionalism.
So similar concerns apply to complaints, investigations,
adjudicative, or appeals hearings that remain open as
of the 31st of July.
Now, there's also a risk that participants who are subject
to investigation or charges
may intentionally delay proceedings
to escape accountability.
We believe that a period of six months is sufficient
to ensure outstanding matter matters are concluded in an
orderly and responsible manner.
In addition, it's important
to acknowledge the potential erosion
of the deterrent effective penalties.
So as the end of racing approaches, participants
may conclude that suspension
or fines will lose practical force.
We therefore propose that fines
that may be imposed remain enforceable
through the district court
ensuring deterrence is maintained through to closure.
We believe these measures are necessary
to close rectory gaps, allow the RIV
to complete its statutory functions
and to safeguard integrity
and animal welfare during the transition period.
It is our experience that the majority
of Greyhound participants are professional
and law abiding people.
We want to ensure that they are afforded the ability
to confidently continue to race fairly
until the time of closure.
We're happy to take any questions. Thank you.
Okay, we've got a few.
So we'll start off with Rachel Ack, uh, thank you chair.
Um, thank you Elliot, um, for your, uh, submission.
And one
of the things you mentioned in your written submission was
that you had raised this need in your view
for tradition transitional arrangements
with a range of parties.
Uh, what's the feedback been?
Is there's a general agreement that that's needed, um,
like when you've raised particularly with officials, that
that would be a helpful thing to do.
Yes, there was a general agreement
that there was a gap here
and it made sense to close it. Okay.
Yeah. Thank you. Uh, miles,
Do you have a question? Thanks,
Suze. Um, look, I noticed in your submission
that you didn't, um, talk about, uh,
current practices within the industry
and there's no comparison there with, um,
the equine industry.
Would you be able to expand on that and,
and give the committee some understanding of the, um,
uh, integrity of the greyhound
industry versus the one industry?
Okay. Uh, so, uh, from the outset, we're a statutory body.
So we at no other support the ban or oppose the ban.
Uh, we're here to regulate the industry.
Um, in terms of the regulatory practice, um,
it's broadly similar across,
across the three codes of racing.
Um, and our broad statutory powers apply to all three.
Um, I know there's been some comment in relation
to comparing the injury
or fatality rate between, uh, equine codes and the dogs.
And we are concerned that sometimes
that can be a little bit misleading
because you're dealing with vastly different animals.
They've got different physiology,
there's different racing regimes.
Uh, so trying
to draw direct comparisons could potentially be misleading.
Um, but for the wider perspective, uh,
the regulatory practice is broadly the same.
Just there's a sup on that.
Please chair, um, very quickly.
So the, um, d you c um, uh, uh,
a major, um, gap if you like, between
what's achieved in the greyhound industry versus the equine
industry, or do you think they all, uh, um,
run at a high integrity rate?
Yes. Look, they all run.
Um, they've all got their own unique, uh, nuances.
Um, and as I've said, we approach the regulation
of the three codes in a similar manner.
Um, they've all got particular pressure
points that they try to address.
Um, and we work closely with all the three codes
of racing in, in order to ensure that there's uh, no gaps.
Thank you very much. Right. We've got questions from
Cameron and Steve, I'm quite keen to slip one of myself self
with be really quick 'cause we are
running outta time. Okay. Really,
Really quick just to clarify, um, uh, Elliot, could I ask,
uh, as part of your, uh, part of the briefings
to the minister for racing, um,
you have reassessed GN Z's progress against 15 focus areas.
Uh, could you tell me the definition of adequate?
Does that mean failing?
So in our submissions, we actually provide a definition
of adequate, um, which,
uh, the RIB considers the GRNZ rules, policies,
and standards are substantially adequate or align
or exceed industry norms. Okay,
Thank you. So it's not,
so there's no below the benchmark,
there is no failing with adequate.
The other, uh, points of focus area are good.
Are there any points that were below par that were failing?
'cause all I see is adequate
and good as your assessment of GN Zs focus areas.
Correct. So as per our last report, uh, we're providing a,
uh, framework or an assessment that they're all adequate.
Um, I think this reflects, uh,
Adequate or good, you mean to say,
Uh, we, we tick the box to say that they're all adequate.
Um, we don't have good, um,
and that reflects, I believe, a journey
that GRNZ has been on in terms
of strengthening their policy levers, uh,
to provide the framework that we've, um, that we can
Sorry, Madam Chair, can I just,
I know there's more questions to
come, but I feel this is important.
Uh, the, the ministers, the briefing
to the minister has got in there, um,
the Racing Industries board assessment of focus areas, uh,
track standards is marked down as good in 2023.
The euthanasia and deaths are marked as good.
So I'm just questioning Elliot, could I ask,
are you sure there is nothing marked
as good in your assessment in 2023?
Oh, look, that could, uh, that could be one
of the historical reports.
We changed the framework in late 2024, uh,
to the current framework, I believe some, which
Is a higher standard.
Then,
Um, arguable we found it was probably more useful to try
to separate what are the policy areas that,
and the levers that GNZ had
and what were things were, were outside their control
and being particular about separating those things to ensure
that they were focused on the things that they could change.
Uh, and that's what we then marked them
as being as, uh, adequate.
Um, you're referring to some of the older reports, uh,
which had a slightly more, uh, uh,
2023 reports. Yeah,
Yeah. It had a
absolutely more one dimensional, uh, assessment.
Just to clarify, we're talking about to
what reports from 12 months
before the 24 20 24 reports
as compared to the 2023.
Yes, correct. Yep. Yep.
Um, I think we had Steve quickly.
Yep. Thank you Madam Chair,
and thank you for your submission.
Do you perceive that there's been substantial, uh,
change in the way that the,
that the Greyhound racing industry operates in recent years
as a result of the significant focus on the welfare issues?
Yes. I've been in the role for two years
and I've certainly been impressed by the way
that they have committed to change.
Um, we see this on the ground in relation
to our kennel inspections For example, in our last, um,
quarterly report, our team undertook 73 inspections across
the, uh, various kennels, um, across both islands.
Uh, and the compliance
with the standards was generally very high.
Um, and where there were small matters,
they were closed out in a relatively short period of time.
So that reflects the on the ground compliance,
which is driven by obviously a focus on welfare, um,
the shifting culture, and probably the leadership of GRNZ.
Okay. Unfortunately, we've reached time, so I won't get
to ask my question, but, um,
thank you very much for your time.
Thank you. Um, we now is Sharon here?
Yes, I am. Oh, you're there. Okay, thank you.
I was reading your submission,
which said you were gonna appear in person, but then
Yes. I, I was originally,
but I
couldn't get the day off work, so.
Oh, okay. Thank you very much. Well, thank, thanks.
We haven't got your camera on,
but that, that's entirely up to you.
But I was just letting you know. Oh,
It, it should be no, start my video.
I'll try that. There we go. That's it.
We can see you. Okay. Okay. Laura is yours. Sharon,
Thank you very much.
Leave some time for questions. Thank you.
My name is Sharon Heon
and I've been involved in Greyhound, a tree
for over 20 years as an own
and as an owner trainer breeder for the past 13 years.
I was raised in racing.
My dad was a harness trainer and my brother was a jockey.
And I'm completely opposed to this bill.
I am an animal lover
and I stopped eating meat when I was 11 years old.
I've always opposed cruelty to animals, battery hens,
sour crates, and definitely live exports.
I would not train greyhounds if I thought it was cruel in
any way and if I didn't think it was right for the dogs.
I got my first dog to train
after I entered a, a Christchurch Club Awards dinner
and the trainer next to me was trying
to sell some young dogs he had.
So I agreed to buy Abby and her name was Fur Patrol
and she came to live with me all 22 kilos of her,
which is not very big.
She taught me so much that I'm forever grateful to her.
She only won the one race and I had to work that day.
So I listened to the race in the lady's toilet at work
with the headphones on and try not to yell too hard.
It's a moment that I will never forget.
Abby stayed with me for the rest of her life.
She used to cuddle up on the passenger side front
seat when we went shopping.
She died as a result
of osteosarcoma when she was 11 years old.
In fact, the first four greyhounds that I trained all remain
with me for life and part of our family.
Fifi died age 15 Hope, age 14, and Darcy nearly 13.
For the past 10 years, I've worked towards the dream of
retiring from my full-time job so
that I can devote all my time to the dogs breeding
and training winners.
That is my passion. Just like so many others who have spoken
to you, my partner
and I have 30 dogs on our property, some racing dogs,
some brewed b*****s, some retired and seven are pups.
Their mother was implanted with Frame
and Steven just five days
before the announcement of the ban.
There is a photo in my submission
of those pups at three months old.
They are lined up at the fence
watching us load the race dogs in the van ears PR desperate
to be part of it, even at that age.
Those puppies turned a year old last
Friday and I've got one of them here.
I dunno if you can see 'em.
Carlos is one of those puppies,
but if this bill goes ahead, he and his brothers
and sisters, they won't get the chance to experience it all
and show just how good they could be.
Right now they're like teenagers,
cheeky little buggers full of energy.
Just what run and chase.
They don't want to be sitting on a sofa.
Rehoming them now would be like asking a teenager
to live in a rest home and asking 'em to sit quietly
and watch Coronation Street when all they really wanna do is
start on track side racing and having a ball.
Accidents do happen on the track
and they, as they do in dog parks and in backyards
and other places, sometimes it's just as simple
as the foot landing the wrong way.
Just like us with an ankle, if we are running
and you don't land the right way, it can break.
I've had a couple in the past few years
that have sustained career ending injuries, broken hawks,
which were operated on at GRNZ expense,
and they were put through the GR
and ZRTR rehabilitation program
where they received excellent care from Ashley and her team,
and now have wonderful homes
where they're cherished and very happy.
We spend between 800
and a thousand every week feeding our dogs.
That's not including vet bills
and registration, that money goes directly
into local businesses.
A vet told me last week, 50% of her work is
with racing Greyhounds.
Our greyhounds function like a family.
The racing dogs support the retired ones.
Every dollar we receive from states goes towards the feed
and care of our dogs.
I genuinely do not know how we will be able to continue
to feed and care for them if this bill passes.
It is, it's hard to believe that so many lives both canine
and human could be thrown into chaos.
That the stroke of a pen under the dubious guide of welfare
when GRNZ along with participants have risen
to the challenge and have met every possible request
for welfare improvements and in most cases exceeded them.
And the fact that the government thinks it's okay in any way
to continue to broadcast
and take bets on Australian
greyhounds is hypocrisy at its finest.
New Zealand has no input into the health, welfare
and safety of those dogs.
Greyhound Racing New Zealand Greyhound
racing in New Zealand.
New Zealand is a sport that has never been for the elite
of society, but for the grafters
and working class people who genuinely love their dogs
and embrace the old Kiwi spirit of competition.
Thrill you get is one of the little guys.
When your dog beats one
of the highest ranking traders in the land is unforgettable
and it can't be matched.
The racing minister's refusal to meet
with GRNZ has left many people feeling
dismissed and unheard.
Many speakers have touched on mental health.
I'm particularly worried about the older traders
they're racing Dolls are the reason they get outta bed in
the morning and the reason they get exercise
and social interaction.
In short, the dogs keep them alive.
A number of jobs that will be lost is immense.
I thought politicians were supposed
to create jobs and not quash them.
I asked you to please reject this bill
because it's wrong on every level.
In the very least I ask
that we are given a much longer wind down period
as they've done overseas.
That is imperative. So my babies
and other trainers, young dogs, can show
what they can do on the track and then retire
and become wonderful pets.
Please also retain the current GRNZ Rehoming Agency.
They are specialists
and you would not find they're equal anywhere in the world.
I understand that the select committee has way more power
than I ever thought.
Um, and, and other people realized, please use it.
Call up the racing minister. Ask him the hard questions.
Don't let him fob you off our loss.
And please do not simply rubber stamp this bill
when there is so much at stake or so many in the industry.
Working with Greyhounds gives me a reason to rise early,
take long walks and sing to my dogs.
We are the champions as a firm favorite.
These dogs are the embodiment of all my hopes
and dreams for the future.
Please do not take that away. Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much, Sharon.
We've got a couple of questions and we'll make them quick.
Steve Abel and then Cameron Luxton.
Hi, uh, Sharon. Thank you so much.
Hi for your great submission.
Um, you mentioned specifically some
of the other animal welfare, uh, issues going on
with this government and you spoke about the hypocrisy, um,
of allowing the greyhound racing gambling
to go on in Australia.
Do you think it's also hypocritical, uh,
that this government's extended the caging of mother pigs
for another 10 years in faring crates, um,
and is proposing to bring back live animal exports,
but you guys have been put out of, uh, business.
Do you think there's a animal
welfare with all speak? I think we should
To the, I think we should stick to the topic at hand.
As I said, we've only got a very brief amount of time
to talk about this bill, so I think we should give share,
show Sharon respect and talk about.
I agree, Steve. Anyway, I think it's disgraceful.
Anyway, carry on.
And Madam Chair, the submitter made
that point in their submission.
I was responding to that. Yeah.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you Sharon.
Um, did Cameron, did you have a question?
No, thank, no thanks Sharon. Um, did address it.
Thank you for submission share. Appreciate
It. Okay. Thank you very
much for your time.
Thank you.
So now we've got Howard. Howard. Awesome.
Oh, okay. Howard, are you ever, are you there?
I understand you're on the same zoom link.
There's an empty
chair here.
He
lovely.
Right. Hello? Can you hear me?
Welcome Howard. Yes. Thank you very much.
The floor's, yours.
Okay. My name's Howard Anderton.
I've been in Greyhounds for approximately 45 years,
which is quite a long time.
The first greyhound I had was trained by a public trainer,
unfortunately late in its career, had an injury.
So the trainer suggested
because I live in town, close to the beach
to take the Greyhound to the beach to give it a bit
of exercise and help it heal.
The problem that it had.
Unfortunately, it, um, it was partly successful.
So I took out my trainer's license to first start.
My dog head was in heat
of the south island champs at qe.
Two highest, highest grade you can get into the dog.
The track at, at that stage was very, very wet.
The dog lit all the way, come back tail wagon,
thought it was the cat's pajamas.
And I thought, this is really easy.
Come to the final, wasn't raining, track was dry
and the dog had trouble going around corners.
So I retired. It started breeding from it.
The purse litter.
The pups were actually born on the water
bed inside my house.
The Greyhound came inside, roamed around the house
and decided that's where she's gonna have the pups.
Now. One of those pups I sold to a Canterbury trainer.
He is still in the game. Now.
Out of the second litter, I sold some of those pups as well,
one to another Canterbury trainer.
He is also still in the industry.
Three of those dogs in the second litter are on the Hall
of fame, on on the actual honors board at Emba CarGel,
at their first meeting at the new track, three
of the pups I sold were winners on that day.
And every time I go to EMBA Cargo to race my dogs,
I can see them on the plaque on the wall there.
I also, um, I'm also opposed to this bill.
I think it's a ridiculous bill made
by a minister of racing that hasn't got the true facts
or hasn't made the true facts available to the public.
And, and parliament.
The Greyhound community is like a big family affair.
I used to belong to a trial track
where we could educate our young dogs.
One young Canterbury trainer had trouble
with their dogs racing around, racing around,
sorry, Addington raceway.
'cause there's no outside fenced dogs lose focus.
So I suggest they come out to this troll track
where we have a pulley fence track.
She bought out her litter of pups.
I tied what they call a drag lu
behind the extra lure on the rail.
Let the dogs chase it up.
The straight after three visits, they went back
to Addington Raceway, all became successful dogs.
And unfortunately, me, some of my dogs had
to compete against them and got beaten.
But I, to the success that she had,
and I was happy for her to win those races
because as I say, the Greyhound community
is a very big family.
We had one senior trainer that's since died.
His name was Ray C**k.
Now any young trainer, we, even big trainer, they could go
to him and he would ask any questions
or reply to any questions about Greyhound raising.
If they had a problem, he would suggest what to do
with your dog to make it more competitive.
So that dog could actually eventually come out
and beat one of his dogs.
But as I say, it's a family of p so you put up with that.
Now, regarding welfare, Mr. Peters says
that he's closed down Greyhound racing due to the PAX
and welfare issue.
Sorry, don't believe that.
When this session of parliament was formed,
Mr. Peters joined forces with the Green Party to try
and close down Greyhound racing.
And he used their support to bring in the geo net ban,
which stopped betting on all forms of racing
and New Zealand on overseas markets by New Zealanders.
So that bill was successful sports betting.
Since that bill was introduced, it's gone up 70%.
So instead of leaving it that Mr. Peters has now decided
it's still a welfare issue
and he wants to close down Greyhound racing.
If you wanna talk about welfare issues,
thoroughbred industry, he's just been
to the Carac yearling sales
and Cara races big spiel on the same weekend.
Auckland Cut was held no interest in
going to the Greyhounds.
Now for statistics at Cara Sales
and throughout the thorough industry, 34
or 40% of the fos that are born
do not make make it to the races.
What happens to them? Do they go to the wins St.
Peter's adjustment pond and we live their life out there.
No, they don't. Some of them are processed
and turned into animal food
and a lot of them are processed
and the meat is sent overseas to countries
that consume horse meat.
Is that fair? When he is picking on greyhounds
and for the low statistics I've got, and yet 30%
or 40% of his below the thoroughbreds
get processed and go overseas.
That doesn't sound very fair to me.
You saw him, you all right?
Yes. Fantastic. Thank you very much. I'll That's right.
Be able to interrupt you for some questions. Now, Howard,
I I haven't quite finished yet.
I believe, sorry. I believe
before Winston Peters made this announcement,
there was a committee presumably set up by the government
that reviewed the reports were done into
Greyhound Racing New Zealand.
They reviewed those reports
and sent the information through to Mr.
Mr. Peters so that he could, you know, review
that information, make a decision.
And as far as I'm aware, their report stated
that they suggested Greyhound racing should you con should
continue under its current stand.
Obviously, Mr. Peters didn't agree with that stance, so he
gave his recommendations.
Now close them down 'cause their welfare standards are bad.
Mr. Mr. Peters for the last three years has refused to talk
to Greyhound New Zealand.
My view on that is he doesn't want to talk to Greyhound,
New Zealand because if he did, then he would find out
that the current standards are second to none right?
Throughout the world. And the figures that he is
currently spouting through news media
are incorrect and outdated.
He doesn't want to know the truth about Greyhound racing,
because if he did, his current star stance on welfare
is non-existent.
Now, just a couple of examples people
say, weren't it for the money?
Ridiculous. Most of the money my partner
and I greyhounds earn, goes back into feed in the old ones.
I've got two young dogs at the present time,
well not young, but they're older dogs.
And another trainer had, they're very immature, took four
to five to six months to get them up
and ready to go to the races.
Now I live slightly outta town,
so I travel down the motorway.
When I get to the off ramp, which is close
to Edington raceway, both these dogs get up
and start barking and growling.
And because they know where they are, they want to go
to the races and they want to race.
So the policy about that we are cruel
and we force 'em to race is an absolute load of rubbish.
So, um, okay. That's all I've got to say.
You got any questions please?
Uh, we've got what we we're just about outta time, Howard,
but we can take one question from
Miles Anderson very quickly.
Miles,
Go ahead. You're on mute.
Yeah, I can, can't hear him mute, but
No, he's, he's on mute if you unmute yourself.
Miles. He's also having all sorts of problems
with, oh yeah, here we go.
Yeah, Howard, I was just, I think you've covered it.
I was, I was just going to ask what you had to say
to people from outside the industry, um,
who are saying that the welfare standards welfare
and the injury rates are too high.
Um, I, you know, frequent local establishment down again
to have the odd lemonade
and people who you talk to that are in the other two codes,
they can't understand
what Winston Peters is going on about welfare
this at the next thing.
Um, they think it's, it's unjust.
Well, my personal view is he's not a minister of racing.
He's a minister of thoroughbred racing.
He cares little about Standard breeds
and nothing at all about greyhounds.
Just as a matter of interest regarding some
of these other well welfare groups, there was a young woman
that was protesting, you know, all the banners
and shirts on, and a trainer said to her, have you ever been
to a Greyhound establishment?
She said, no. So she went and visited his kennels
and said everything that she was told
by her auntie type group was incorrect and inact.
And she actually got a job at that establishment,
was helping them out with the dogs
and helped take 'em to the races and handle 'em on race day.
So a lot of these so-called aunties to propaganda that they
keep on spouting off this absolute rubbish.
Okay, thank you very much, Howard.
We've reached time and thank you very much
for your insightful experiences.
It's been fantastic. Um, we now have
Point of order. Madam
Chair.
Yes, Steve, To make a very brief clarification
of something, uh, on that submission that, uh,
all the parties supported the, uh, the geo net position
that the government had
and it was not in any way developed within
accordance with the Green Party.
We weren't involved in that. It was unanimously supported.
So just for clarification of the, the facts on that one.
Okay, thanks Steve.
Um, we now have Sean Glasses
Lin in person.
Thank you very much. Welcome, Sean,
How you going?
Very good. The floor is yours.
Thank you. Um, I'm a Greyhound trainer.
I have done so for the past 10 years, uh,
since I was 19 years old.
I currently have 26 grands in my care.
Uh, I'm based in Waikato.
Um, the greyhounds mean everything to me.
Um, it's, it's really important.
It's a seven day a week job.
Um, there's a lot involved behind the scenes, um, that a lot
of people tend to not give credit to.
Um,
and it's my job, my income, and my future.
And that is the reason why I came into this, uh,
10 years ago with the mindset of making a career out of it.
Not to get whitewashed 10 years in, um,
and lose all my investments.
Now I've poured all my savings into this, um,
to set up my operation.
Um, you kind of get a reflection of what's involved with,
um, what you've heard on day one and today.
Um, many, many factors, a lot of foundation's gone down to,
to, to be where I am today.
Um, and it's really disappointing
that we haven't been given the time of day at all from
any part of the racing Minister's position at all.
Um, you know, it's been mentioned a lot
that we haven't had any consultation from Winston Peters,
um, at all through this process.
And I think it goes a little bit further than disappointing.
Um, I think he has a obligation as our racing minister
to actually fulfill his role as racing minister.
And it's always been a three code, um, racing industry.
You know, it is not just two, it's three.
And today it's still three. We operate as three.
I know the ban is being proposed.
Um, but currently now we still operate as three
and we don't do anything illegal.
You know, we are sitting here operating legally as we speak.
Um, and I think it's important that we get fair justice
from this, um, process.
Um, thousands
and thousands of dollars I've bought into setting up.
Um, and that's gonna have zero to nil return for me.
Um, I rent my property, it's taken a lot to set it up,
and the thought of having to deconstruct that at my cost
as well is gut wrenching, um,
when the band comes into place, if it does,
which I strongly oppose, that's my position here.
Um, I'm gonna be left with 26 grands in my care now.
They don't just get rehome overnight, as you know, we
run at a higher, roughly 700, um,
with our rehoming per year.
Now, you know, you can do the math.
Um, it takes a long time to rehome 26 dogs,
let alone everything in the industry.
Um, one thing I'd like to mention is
in terms of the ROB, the Racing Integrity Board,
they oversee everything.
Uh, they are our watchdog.
They're there for justice to have everything,
um, plain scale.
Um, there's no concern
or there's no red flags
or very minimal red flags, you know, um,
I heard their submission and there's a lot of green ticks.
Um, kennel audits.
I've had multiple kennel audits myself over the years.
Um, I've never had one fail.
Um, I guess the question I have is,
we are being closed
or we are being, uh, asked
as being, uh, sorry, lost my train of thought.
It's been proposed for closure, um, underground of welfare.
I guess what I want to ask is where is the welfare concerns?
What are the welfare concerns
and what welfare concerns does Winston have?
Because we haven't been able to speak to the minister, um,
15 attempts from Greyhound, New Zealand,
zero return, that's appalling.
Um, you don't, you you shouldn't get that.
Um, it's not where we should be in the modern world,
let alone, you know, in New Zealand.
Um, and as, as frankly, it's just not good enough.
Now, a point I would like
to highlight is I represent the younger trainers,
um, of the industry.
Um, and the new generation
of trainers aren't getting a fair crack.
Um, like I say, I've climbed the ladder of
to get, uh, you know, the, the, the ladder of
starting from zero and getting to where I am now
with the intention of a, a full scale career to go on with.
Um, the youth are getting ripped off that, um, and myself
and, and it's not fair.
It's not justice. Um, I've read the reports,
you know, the past reports.
Um, we all have, I assume you all have.
Um, I didn't like some of the things I read, you know,
there's no hiding what's in the reports,
but the reports are there because we're transparent.
We put everything on paper.
Um, we used to get attacked for, well, not attacked,
but we used to get rallied for not being transparent.
Um, and it didn't used to work in our favor.
So we switched to being transparent.
And now it's kicking us even further
because we're transparent about everything we do.
And because we record everything, all the nitty gritty bits
and pieces and the little red flags, they're all, um,
accumulating to be made up to this big bubble
of this industry as, as, as rough on the dogs.
It's keyless on the dogs. It's not fair on the dogs.
And they're mistreated. They're not mistreated.
They're our investment. They're our animals, our athletes.
If I mistreat my greyhounds, I don't have an income.
If I don't have an income, I can't pay my rent
and I can't make a living now. Hey,
Sean, if I could just interrupt you there Yes.
Because we have got a couple of people
that would like questions, and we're almost at time.
So do you just wanna quickly wrap up
or are you happy to take a couple of questions now?
Uh, yes, I,
I I can take questions. Yep, sure. I'm happy to take
Questions. Okay, thank you very much. We've
got one from Mark
and then from Cameron Luxton.
Uh, thank you dear and thank you
Sean, for your submission.
I just had a question around you.
You know, I look at, um, in your submission, the yes,
significant investment you've made.
Yep. Um, and do you have a, you know, do you have a view
or maybe you can talk to us about, you know,
these were the rules, you've invested a lot of money
and I guess, you know, may or may not have been borrowed.
Yep. Um, and you've done everything right in your mind.
What's that look like in terms of, you know, the,
the actual financial loss and I,
and even your, what's it look like, 26 dogs, four
or $5 a day to feed a dog?
Um, how's that gonna be funded?
I don't think I can feed a dog, to be honest.
Four or $5 a day. But, um, the, the loss is, is, is massive.
Like I say, I've invested all of my savings into this. Now.
I can't reimburse a lot of those losses
because lasers, dog trailers, kennels, walkers,
hydro baths, um, ultrasound machines, dog modules,
therapy mats.
When you take away an industry with specific equipment,
you, there's no, there's little to no resale value.
Um, which leaves me in a very bad place and a lot of people.
And, and that's where the loss is gonna come. Thank
You. Um, quickly,
Cameron. Yeah,
Thank you Sean. Um,
you, thank you. You talked about younger generations
that you represent and we've had older generations.
We've heard it's a family structure.
We've heard from submitters
that have got entire families involved now,
and going back generations, the transparency that you,
the trust you've shown, trying to be as open as possible,
you feel is kicking you in the back,
in the, in the backside.
What is this, what do you think this is gonna do
to the mental health of people
who are involved in this industry?
Uh, the mental health is, it's,
it's running rampant in a, in a bad way.
Um, I see that on, on on people's faces
and, you know, here we are six months out from a a,
a supposed ban
and we have no information, little to no information.
We have no information around how the structure
of the ban is gonna take place and,
and how the dog's gonna be rehomed.
Uh, the mental health is not in a good place and,
and it's quite important, mental health.
Um, well at least I thought it was, um,
as a government aspect.
Um, so it is a deep concern.
Okay. Thank you very much. Thanks.
Usually for your time, Sean. Yeah,
Thank you.
Next up we have Rachel Ray from Night Rave Greyhounds,
who is Hi Rachel.
I think you know the drill by now,
but if you time leave some time for questions
that be great in theory.
I have a six minute speech. Okay. Far away.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Today I am speaking to my own personal submission
and also on behalf of my organization,
night Rave Greyhounds.
The two perspectives come from different roles within the
Greyhound industry, but ultimately
arrive at the same conclusion.
This bill should not proceed.
Night Rave Greyhounds submission reflects the frontline
frontline reality of rehoming and welfare delivery.
My personal submission reflects decades
of hands-on experience with dogs training,
education, and animal behavior.
They're distinct voices together, they tell a fuller
and more accurate story than has been represented on social
media and by supposed animal welfare advocate groups.
First, the rehoming and industry impact perspective.
Knight Rave, Greyhound's Limited is one of Greyhound racing,
new Zealand's largest rehoming partners.
This is not a peripheral organization.
Knight Rave operates nationwide, employs 15 kennel staff,
supports 10 volunteers
and has been re-homing greyhounds for nearly 15 years.
Much of this work is based in smaller regional centers
where these jobs and skills cannot easily be replaced.
If this bill proceeds as proposed,
those livelihoods disappear.
In some cases, staff will also lose their homes as live
and accommodation is tied directly
to the re-homing properties.
This is not an abstract consequence, it's immediate,
personal and irreversible beyond the people.
There are currently around 90 retired greyhounds already in
our care, relying entirely on funding from GRNZ.
When GRNZ ceases to exist, that funding disappears.
And at present there is no clear funded
or legislated plan
to ensure these dogs are supported through to re-homing.
And yet, welfare has been
repeatedly cited as the justification.
The argument does not stand up to scrutiny.
Greyhound racing is the most heavily regulated
animal industry in New Zealand.
Every injury, every death,
and every incident is reported,
welfare outcomes are transparent
and they have improved dramatically.
Race day deaths have fallen
by over 87% from 102 in the
27 20 17 18 season to just 13.
In 20 23, 24.
Major injuries now affect only 6.57 dogs per
1000 starters.
That is an exceptionally low rate
by any comparative standard
to any animal sport in New Zealand.
These improvements did not happen by accident.
They the result of concrete reforms, the fully funded rehab
to rehome program, mandatory veterinary stand downs
after any fall or impact
and preferred box draw races
that have significantly reduced the potential for injury,
as well as straight tracks
and other things that have been spoken about by others.
Despite this, the outdated statistics continue
to be quoted publicly while the minister refuses
to engage directly with those of us
who are delivering the welfare outcomes.
If welfare is truly the concern, then accuracy, evidence
and engagement must matter.
Second, the lived experience with DO'S perspective,
obviously the above is also personal to me,
it's my livelihood as well.
But speaking from a different place,
I have another story to tell.
My background spans retraining race horses,
teaching equine qualifications,
which include the racing qualifications at a tertiary level,
owning, racing, greyhounds, training dogs,
and leading a dog's New Zealand affiliated training club.
I'm not speaking about welfare in theory,
I'm talking about dogs.
I have lived with trained, handled, shown,
and trusted in public spaces.
I have taken retired racing greyhounds dogs
who have completed full racing careers
and shown them to breed champion titles, obedience titles,
canine good citizen qualifications,
and taken them into the Canine Friends program
where they visit schools, hospitals, and rest homes.
These roles demand soundness, calm, temperament,
friendliness, and excellent handling.
Injured and unstable. Dogs can't participate.
These dogs succeeded not despite their racing career, but
because of their racing background.
As president and lead trainer of a dog club,
I am in a position to make a confronting comparison.
You may not have thought of many dogs breed specifically
for pet homes or the show ring are less prepared for life
as companions than the ex racing greyhound.
That re really that reality changes, sorry,
that reality challenges the assumption
that banning racing improves dog welfare.
My submission also raises a broader concern. Precedent.
Dogs are not ornaments.
They're working, learning problem solving animals,
greyhounds, race guide dogs guide assistance,
dogs assist working dogs work stock sporting dogs
compete alongside their handlers.
If we accept the idea that providing animals
with structured, regulated work is inherently unethical,
the logic does not stop with greyhound racing,
this bill does not exist in isolation.
And the further ramifications are seriously concerning
for an economy built on agriculture
where these perspectives meet.
These two submissions are different in focus,
but they converge on the same conclusion.
Welfare improvements are real, measurable and ongoing.
The dogs are not broken.
The systems supporting them are not failing
and the people delivering these outcomes are
not being heard.
If the ban is to proceed at all, it must be revisited,
delayed, and redesigned.
With clarity around re-homing funding
and asset protection, GR nzs funds
and assets must be preserved
for the dogs they exist to support.
And if greyhound racing is deemed unacceptable in
New Zealand, then it is inconsistent
and ethically indefensible for the government
to continue profiting from overseas greyhound racing
through broadcasting and betting.
It is also ethically indefensible to keep on
with horse racing as well as reporting is not even remotely
as detailed as G Nzs.
This bill does not simply end a sport.
It dismantles an ecosystem of welfare, delivery,
employment expertise,
and community without a credible future plan for the welfare
of the community or dogs involved,
including no mental health retraining
or compensation support
and no con concrete re-homing program.
Both submissions ask for the same thing.
Not a denial of welfare responsibility,
but evidence-based decision-making, genuine engagement
and time to do this properly for the sake of the dogs,
the people who care for them,
and the integrity of animal welfare policy in this country.
This bill must be revisited. Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much Rachel. Um,
are there any questions from any members?
I can't see any hands up. Put everyone to sleep.
Yeah, no, no, no. Not
Was covered it all.
It was a very, it was a very impressive succinctly. Yeah.
Submiss. You thank so thank you very much. Yeah, thank you.
Thank you. Thank you.
Okay. Do we have a break now? Do Oh wow. Okay.
We now have a break. We're actually pretty much on time,
so if we could reconvene at 12:30 PM please.
Thank you. Thanks again much.
Thank you. Back in session.
And Steve, you just had something you wanted
to address quickly before we
proceed with the public session.
Yeah. Just to quickly say Madam Chair, can you make sure
that all of the members of the committee remain at the end
of the hearing so that we can have time with officials?
'cause I think there's a number of questions we've got.
Absolutely. Yep. Thank you. Thank you. Okay.
We, uh, calling on Christchurch Greyhound Racing
Club via Zoom.
Sarah Klausen.
See she's raised your hand.
Um, yeah, she had to accept the prompt.
Okay. Sarah, we just need
to take yourself off mute and then we are good to go.
Sarah.
Hi. Sorry. I wasn't sure why that wasn't working.
No, excellent. Welcome
to the primary Production Select Committee.
You've got 10 minutes. Um, you can take your submission
as read and if you could please allow some time
for questions, that would be fantastic. Far away.
Thank you. So my name is Sarah Clawson
and I'm the CEO of the Christchurch Greyhound Racing Club.
I oppose the ban.
The Christchurch Greyhound Club employs 15 staff members
and works with many contractors
and businesses in the Canterbury region.
Most of my staff and I are not only involved in the industry
through the sole form of employment.
I have staff members who own shares in racing.
Greyhounds have retired greyhounds as pets
volunteer in the greyhound re-homing sector
and work in racing kennels.
This ban not only impacts their main form of income,
but their entire way of life.
To give you a few examples of the impact to our contractors,
our electrician will lose 55% of his business.
Our cleaners will lose 30% of their business.
Christchurch Greyhound provides 64% of the racing
to the local photo fitness business.
We pay rent that exceeds 300,000.
Our food and beverage generates over 300,000 annually.
Also since the announcement of the ban,
the Christchurch Club has had zero contact when the,
with the Ministerial advisory committee.
We rent facilities, we own assets such as tractors
and buildings and we have cash in the bank.
There is only now six months left of racing.
How can we be expected to operate as a business
plan for current racing?
Ensure we stick to our incorporated rules
and manage a potential closure?
There has been no contact or guidance.
I am in a unique position
where my partner is also a Greyhound trainer.
We personally hold a Rehoming contract with Darren z.
I have pre previously held a governance role
and I currently work for one of the racing clubs.
I see and have seen every aspect of
how this potential closure will affect our people.
I could continue going on about the impacts,
but I thought I would use this time
to give you an opportunity to ask me some questions on
how this potential closure imp impacts our Canterbury people
and our Canterbury economy.
Fantastic, thank you very much.
Now does anyone have any questions?
Well, that just finished a bit. Ah, Steve, sorry.
I think you caught us a bit on the hop.
Sarah, you took our, took our advice very well. Thank you.
Good. That's great. Yeah, we've got Steve
and then Cameron Luxton.
Yeah, thank you Sarah.
And for your substantive, uh,
written submission from the club as well.
Um, you are proposing an extension
of the band by another year.
Um, is that from the six month proposed
closure for another year?
And how much of a difference would that make
for participants in the industry?
So obviously I don't want racing to cease at all.
Oh, I understand that. Understand. Yeah.
Um, given the, what, when the band was announced,
people were still breeding.
There were pups being born
and there was, uh, there was dogs being inseminated at, at,
at the round, the closure.
So what allowing at least another year of racing
would give people an opportunity to raise their dogs
that were born and potentially earn money off them.
'cause up to this point, people were still rearing.
We personally had four pups that were born two months
before the announcement of the closure all going.
Well, hopefully they will start racing this month,
which means they only get five months left of racing.
However, dogs don't usually peak around the racing hour
and a full racing mode till they're about two years old.
So at least getting a year means that we would have
that time of trainers being able to race
what they have on the ground plus their pups
and all that, that are born in the interim.
And it would be much more fear on
what people have invested in the industry to date.
Thank you. Um, Cameron Luxton,
Thank you. Uh, I have
a question. Sarah.
How much, uh, what sort sort
of is the asset base of the Christchurch Club?
Like what, what, what assets does the club own that's going
to be, um, I don't know what word nationalized,
appropriated, um, take Sure.
Um, what's the, and the second question is, uh, how,
how have you met with,
have you had any contact from mps ministers, uh,
or anyone during this process since the announcement?
So in regards to our assets, uh, at the last set
of accounts, we chose to half the value
of our racing infrastructure due to the fact,
so it was initially worth over, um, 800,000 roughly.
Um, we chose to half that in our last set of accounts
because effectively if what racing was
to cease on the 31st of July, it would not be of any value
to anybody such as the running rail on the track
and our lower arms and all that sort of thing.
So technically when we were still racing,
we saw those assets of around 800,000
plus we have over 800,000 cash in the bank.
We own assets such as tractors
and all that that yes can be resold.
We have a, we have a specialized vet room that we got, um,
designed, which is a port com type thing,
which can be uplifted and sold,
but as, as you as when running a business, you know,
we have GST returns, we have assets that may, may
or may not need to be sold,
but to date we have had zero contact.
So at the 31st of July, I can tell my staff members
who are employed purely for race day,
you don't have a job anymore.
But someone, like for myself,
do I just walk away from the business on the 31st of July
and just say, here is everything you manage sorting
out the rental agreement.
You sort out the track and, and all those sorts of things.
So there's, and doing the GST return,
which we probably would get cash back from to then use
that money to give towards our LPs or you know,
and of course in all this, we still are incorporated society
that follows all these rules.
And we need to be making sure that myself and our club
and our board are being responsible at the same time.
And your now your second question with regards to contact,
I've obviously met you personally on course,
which was very much appreciated
to show you all, all sides of racing.
However, I have met with Nicola, Greg, um, did meet her.
We also went to a presentation from David Seymour
and he, he, he was surprised to be honest, of the level lack
of contact we have had.
And our only opportunity to talk to the Prime Minister was
for a couple of minutes where we went out
of obviously working hours to a present presentation
that he held, um, talking about how he was going
to boost the economy, which
of course completely contradicts everything that he's going
to be doing to our industry.
Thank you very much. Sarah,
are there any more questions members?
Awesome. Thank you very much
for your time and your commitment.
Thank you. So next we
have
Catherine Burs.
Oh, hi Catherine. Hello.
Welcome to the primary production select committee.
You have 10 0 5 minutes
and, um, feel free
to leave some time at the end for questions.
Thank you very much.
Okay. Thank you for giving me the opportunity
to speak to this committee.
My involvement in the animal movement in activist
and government's role spans 45 years.
Most recently for seven years until 2023
as a board member faith, currently I'm servant
to two retired racing greyhounds the ninth
and 10th I've had in my life.
I'm strongly against this band
because greyhounds in welfare terms
are the most protected animal group in New Zealand
improvements made over the past five years.
Something activists refuse to acknowledge
places welfare well within an acceptable standards according
to the RIB and renders,
the government stated welfare objectives plainly dishonest
owners and trainers, many
who are generations deep family operations
have invested millions of dollars
and effectively set a benchmark which other racing codes in
New Zealand and internationally could well aim to meet.
Welfare regulations are well beyond those required
by the Animal Welfare Act
and strictly enforced no such protection
for the estimated 200,000 New Zealand farm dogs,
or for the many purebred dogs producing pups
to be sold at significant prices by breeders.
The owners and trainers love their greyhounds.
My retired greyhounds when, when reunited
with their trainers have always been absolutely ecstatic.
They love their trainers propaganda by the animal activists
and the use of social media platforms such as Facebook,
together with a journalistic malpractice
by the mainstream media has created what appears
to be public support for a ban.
Activist narratives are accepted, unchallenged,
and the information sped out by them
reported as fact by the media.
This process has been not going ongoing
and cemented in the minds of the public
that racing greyhounds are poorly treated, forced to race
and are euthanized when their racing days are over.
It provides the government
with a questionable social license.
Activists have scored no doubt secured donor dollars in the
process, but it is all a lie
if our politicians ignore the truth
and push through the ban to achieve
what is clearly political objective, deeply concerning
as their apparent absence of rehoming plans.
Where is the recognition that this requires more time?
And why is it that this is
that the superb rehoming structure funded
by greyhounds New Zealand is being ignored?
The great mates in rehabilitation program transitions
greyhound greyhounds from its canine centric life
and prepares them for rehoming by the Greyhound, uh, groups
for life as companions in a human centric environment.
It ensures greyhounds are suitably matched.
PRI provides ongoing support for adoptees
and even accepts dogs back.
If the human dog interaction doesn't work out, the wellbeing
of the dog is paramount.
No dog may be euthanized
because there is difficulty finding them at home For
that reason, entrusting the SPCA with this is unthinkable
and clearly not supported at any level by those that own
and trade and love these dogs.
If honesty prevails, this band should be dumped.
It is based on a lie
and removes welfare protection from the greyhounds.
It is unacceptable to destroy the lives
of hardworking New Zealanders who have complied
with everything asked of them
and not been given the decency of any level
of consultation by the government.
They're suffering, their fragility is on clear display.
Listening to them last Thursday was heartbreaking
and actually quite frightening.
At least extend the out
for several years while retaining the Greyhound,
New Zealand humming program.
This could perhaps have, uh, provide a modicum
of mental relief.
It could save lives, animal lives, and actually human lives.
That's all I've got to say.
Um, thank you very much Catherine.
Unfortunately, we've reached time
so we are not gonna be able to take any questions,
but thank you very much for your time today.
That's okay. Thank you. Uh,
We now have Wayne Steele who is joining us via Zoom.
Oh no, you are here. I need
Okay.
Thank you. Thank you for the opportunity. Hi Wayne. Welcome.
Um, I'm obviously against this band.
Um, you've read my, my submission.
I don't want to go into too much detail about that.
I'd rather have some dialogue if possible.
But I'd just like to say that
I've been training dogs for 30 years.
I recently paid my mortgage off four or five years ago.
And I, and it was hard work like anybody
getting to that point in time.
But I could see a future with investment
that I've made in the last three or four years.
Um, I spent over $150,000
and improved the facilities, not
that there was anything wrong before, but made,
made more space for my son to return home and train.
And we were looking at expanding to the point
that my daughter could possibly work with us as well.
Obviously, um, this is drastically going to affect that.
Um, I don't have a kiwi saver
or any of those sorts of things because of the fact
that our income was up and down before.
So I'm looking at the future thinking,
what will I do at 53 years old?
How am I going to now, uh, provide for my family and,
and what are my children gonna do?
Um, I wrote a couple of notes
to try and think where I was going.
Um, so to me personally, it's all
around the transparency and injuries
and things that seem to be what the public, um,
have a concern with.
And what sport could somebody be injured where seven days
after, uh,
the supposedly being injured will come onto the rugby field
for the All Blacks and play for their country
and play to the best of their ability?
Probably you, you couldn't if you were technically injured.
So I believe that when we have these seven day stand downs,
10 day stand downs that are more precautionary
to make sure an animal can line up and,
and be in safe condition, um, that's not an injury,
but it's all being piled into the same numbers and,
and it makes it look bad.
But then how does it look bad if you
have nothing to compare it to?
So if, if we've, we've got all this transparency,
if you can't compare, so an apple, you,
if you've got a rotten apple, is that apple good
or is it bad if you haven't got anything else to eat?
So it's like, how, how can you compare us
to something else if there's nothing else to compare us to,
apart from Greyhound racing in Australia, which we, uh, meet
and exceed in a, in a lot of those avenues.
Um, I don't know the the stats exactly from that, um,
but I just feel that we have been harshly criticized.
Um, we've done everything that's been asked of us.
So another analogy for me is if I worked for you
and you said I wasn't good enough at my job.
So I go up to hr, they send me on some courses,
things in my own time.
I improve, I do all those things over the next 12 months.
I go back to HR and they go, well done,
boss is gonna be happy with you.
And then the next day I get a text from the boss saying,
you're fired or you've got 12 months to leave.
And that's pretty much the situation that we're in.
We've done everything that we, that was asked of us
and we were doing it before we were asked.
We, we had these things in place over this last 10 years.
We've supplemented, at one point it was six
or $8 million towards harness racing out
of our direct income from the TAB.
The things that we've done in the last four
or five years could have happened sooner,
but we were actually subsidizing the other codes.
So we didn't have the income. So we reduced the states
that we were running for, for the better good
of the industry of the three horse codes.
Um, or sorry, two horse codes and, and the grounds.
So I find it very hard to fathom that we are being judged
for our actions, but it's not our actions now.
We've been judged for something else,
for somebody's perception.
Um, uh,
and my my sort of ending thing with this is
if we're gonna be shut down,
I believe Greyhound racing in New Zealand already has every
procedure, every, every, every measure in place
for the wind down of Greyhound racing.
I think that greyhound racing should be left
with their reserves, their money, their assets, to actually
do everything involved in the closing down
of the industry apart from the re-homing side just yet.
So, so they can compensate the trainers they know best who,
who would, um, needs compensation, who needs more,
who needs this, and can work that out with
what we've already got and use the 40 million
that is coming in from ground racing in Australia, uh,
or bet on grounds in Australia
and use that for the Rehoming site
and allow us to do that as well
because we've already had those things in place
and I think we we're the best people to know
how to do this properly.
And I think someone coming in from the outside
will not have the knowledge and,
and in the next six months, this isn't gonna happen
Much. Thank, thank you very
much. Thanks very much. Wayne.
Look, we've got a couple of questions here.
There will need to be quick. Cameron Luxton
and then Steve Abel. Um,
Thank you Wayne, that, uh,
what you just said about the subsidizing of harness racing.
Um, I, for one haven't heard that.
I don't think the committee's heard that yet.
Could you, after the submissions over provide the committee
with some, um, uh, some background on that, on
what actually happened when there was a subsidy, uh,
and reducing in stakes to be able to do that? Thank
You. Yes, I certainly can.
And just to add to that, um,
we actually took the TAB to court over that and we won.
But then the, uh, TAB said, oh,
we're gonna change the way we pay, pay out.
So the status quo until such time as we are changing our,
our, um, don't think get the right word, but
but how that structure was for distributing the money.
Well, thank you. That would be very beneficial.
Um, Steve Abel,
Just quickly, are you suggesting
that there is potentially enough money in the current
coffers of the whole industry
of Greyhound racing New Zealand, that if it was left
with the duty of taking care of, uh, rehoming
and potential compensation of industry for losses
and members of the industry, that that would be preferable
to what is currently on the table?
And I understanding you don't want the band,
but if it's gonna happen that it would be better
that GRNZ manage, um, all of the financial side of it,
including compensating industry players?
Yes, as long as that 40 million from Australia was
there for the Rehoming.
So my belief is that, that we do it out of what we have for,
for our industry as such.
And then the Rehoming side paid for through,
through ground racing in New Zealand, running that as well
through that 40 million in income from, uh,
hunting on Australian greyhounds.
But then there's a hypocrisy in us allowing us
to punt on Australian greyhounds full stop.
Right then, then presumably you would prefer there's a
limited time on that because clearly that's,
I mean I certainly, it's our view that, it's my view
that it's totally hypocritical for us to allow people
to bear on greyhound racing in
Australia. While we're banning it here.
I believe exactly the same.
But my thought is either there,
the government forks out the money that they need to,
to solve the issue that they're going to, um, course.
But I do believe, uh,
that we probably would be the best people to serve, um,
compensation and any aspect around what needs
to be done within that shut down.
We'd be more than capable of doing that.
Okay. Thank you. Very
Useful. Excellent. Thank you very
much Wayne. And if you could
follow up with the information
regard, that would be brilliant.
Thank you. We'll send a reminder from the,
um, the committee anyway.
Um, we now have Michelle stepping from May Hounds via Zoom.
Hi Michelle.
Hi. Hi.
Welcome to the primary production select committee.
Um, it's great to have you here.
You've got 10 minutes
and you can take your submission as read
and a few, um, leave some time
for Queen's questions at the end.
That would be fantastic. Thanks for, excuse me.
Yes, we've just heard a text saying
that nobody can see the live stream.
Oh, thank you. Well just hold, hold that thought, Michelle.
We'll just see. Okay. That's it.
Oh, thank you. Do you wanna go back to them
and just check I've got someone you can Oh yeah.
That or that it's come back on. Yeah. Okay. Sorry.
Sorry about that. Michelle, the full is yours. That's okay.
Uh, so good afternoon. So I'm Michelle Ebing.
I am co national coordinator
and chair of May Hounds Charitable Trust,
Greyhound re homing, a passionate greyhound owner
of 13 years, um, along with foster carer
and general Greyhound advocate.
Um, my family currently own three greyhounds.
Um, unfortunately none right here with me
as they're all lounging around the other end of the room.
Um, but I do have some other friends behind me.
Um, today I'm speaking on my personal submission,
but also on behalf of May Hounds, may Hounds,
and I oppose the ban.
My work with May Hounds, along with the rest
of the team is voluntary.
Um, I head the adoption and fostering team, um,
and I am fully hands on.
So the role is 24 7 along with my full-time day job.
It honestly leaves time for little else.
Um, but I dirt for the hounds, the love of the hounds,
and I wouldn't have it any other way
when the band was announced.
My heart just s san. Um, for those in the industry, many
of whom are friends, but also for the countless hounds
that would be needing rehoming,
it was truly a daunting thought.
Should the bang go ahead.
I do believe that a wind down period of five to 10 years,
much like they're doing in Tasmania,
would be a much more proactive, um, proactive approach.
It would allow the hounds
that are currently in the system the opportunity to run,
fulfill out their desires, and also learn the life skills
before they're ready for the couch.
It would also reduce pressure on re-homing, um,
whilst maintaining the highest welfare standards
that are currently in place come the 1st of August.
These standards are set to reduce
as the greyhounds will fall into the same,
under the same standards
as the current pet dogs throughout New Zealand
wind now would also ensure that the trainers
who lives are dependent on the income from racing are able
to look forward to what they're going to be doing, um,
ideally with the support, um, to receive adequate support
and compensation in the process.
To date, Mac has not
provided any information to participants
or re homers on who is gonna care for the Hounds
and how they're gonna be re-homed.
When we are looking at 2000 greyhounds needing Rehoming
income the 1st of August, Information has been gathered
by them, but we are less than six months to go.
We don't know who is gonna be caring for the dogs,
who is gonna looking after them,
and who is gonna be rehoming them,
and what, if any, support will there be.
May Hounds was established in 2018, born out
of relationships with trainers wanting
to give their hounds the opportunity
to find a couch after retirement.
We are very proud to have, um, been partnered
with Grins great mates since 2020,
working alongside their Rehoming team,
their rehoming kennels and the trainers.
Welfare has been their top priority
and it has proven to be a robust,
transparent, and supportive program.
Each hound enters the program having been desexed added,
dental, dental, and a health check.
Any health concerns are addressed.
They go through the safer assessment, um,
behavioral assessment.
They get their walks.
Enrichment and socialization be
before being allocated to the likes of us
or one of the other rehoming partners.
When they're ready to find their their home.
Every hound is tracked from birth to adoption.
No other, no other animal sector does this.
No other re-homing sector does. This.
Last year we combined adopted,
had 697 Hounds rehomed,
and that is no easy feat.
It takes knowledge, expertise, and time,
and this can't be underestimated.
The Tea Transitional Agency lacks all of this,
and it's only gonna lead to increased welfare concerns
and poorer rehoming outcomes.
You'll see increased pressures on current re homers
and rescuers as greyhounds take the place of other dogs
that are seeking their homes For us,
the government has also been focused on speed.
Rehoming isn't something that can or should be rushed.
Yes, some hound slot into to homes like a glove,
but others take time.
Each one is an individual
and they should be treated as such.
90% of our home, our hound, sorry, go into foster care
to so that we can truly assess their needs
and place them with a home that is suitable for
what they need in life.
And you never actually know when a suitable
home's gonna come along.
One fosterer of mine was with, with me for 17 months,
and yet that is an awfully long time.
He was not a difficult dog.
He just needed a bit more exposure
to urban environments, which we gave him.
He wasn't your city slicker.
He was small, he was black, he was plain,
he could be a little shy when meeting new people,
and he absolutely hated the cameras.
So getting photos that really showed his personality
was an absolute nightmare.
Um, but it was by chance that a couple who were thinking
of adopting a hound came to an event.
Clint was currently rest, was resting at the time.
Um, but we took them to meet him
and there was an instant connection.
The following weekend, they came to my house,
we introduced their dog to him,
and he, he left that same day.
Excuse, sorry. It was very emotional.
Be needless to say, he settled into that home really well.
Um, and he never looked back
as if he hadn't been anywhere else.
And it was really a case of right time, right place,
right time, and right people.
We have seen hand
how lovingly our hounds have been raised
from pup to race dog.
It is that journey that has set them up to retire
as such wonderful pets, unique and quirky.
Yes, they're certainly that.
They feel the heat, they feel the cold.
They can be easily overwhelmed
and some are a bit reserved when they first meet you,
but their blood is highly sought after as donor blood
and they greet other hounds
as if they're their long last long lost bestie.
But it's these quirks with their gentle dor nature,
which make them so special.
As re homers, our role is
to transition each hound from athlete to pet with care
and consideration rush this phase
and you set the dogs up for failure
or have them returned as they are unsuitable for the family.
They've been placed with something we try to avoid, but have
and will always take a dog back no matter
what the circumstances.
There cannot be set times placed on rehoming.
It takes as long as it takes,
and it should be fully supported
to allow the current REHOMING program, including those
of us within it, with the expertise required to continue
to rehome to the highest welfare standards,
the best rehoming outcomes in our safe
and loving hands if the man, Hey Michelle,
I'm just gonna interrupt you there
because we have for each time,
and I do wanna give Steve Abel a chance
to ask her very quickly, sorry.
Oh, no, that's fine. But thank you so much for, for your,
the information you've provided and for your,
and I understand it is very emotional for you,
but we'll just take Steve's
question and then we better wrap it up.
Yeah, thanks very much. A
Very quick question With the preamble that, um,
it is our understanding that the existing rehoming
agencies will continue under the plan
of the transitional agency and,
and there's been no pushback from the likes
of or anything on that.
So that, that should be great, more clear to you.
But, um, that's certainly our understanding.
My question is on the length of time
that you want the extension on the band,
realizing you don't want the band,
but if it is gonna happen mm-hmm.
Um, wouldn't the concern be that if you extended it
for five years, then you're re you,
you're gonna require a new round of breeding
and currently if we, if it was only extended for a year
or two, then there would be no new breeding.
And I think that seems to be even more problematic for the,
uh, process of an industry wind down.
Um, I guess, I guess that includes the rehoming phase
as well, so it would be, if you like, a natural wind down.
So the dogs that are in the system already would be the dogs
that continue racing
to the point in which there are really realistically not
enough dogs for racing.
I guess we don't realist really know the time on, on that,
but then once you add the rehoming into that,
that is gonna be another, um,
another length on time on top of the racing itself.
Okay. Thank you very much, Michelle.
We're gonna have to wrap it up there. Thanks Steve.
Thank you. Okay,
we now have Sean
Hannon fantastic.
I'm sure you know the drill by Noah, so welcome.
Yes, thank you. Um, I've been an independent director
of Greyhound Racing New Zealand since 2013,
and the chairman since 2017.
I'm also a director of Racing New Zealand,
the tri code entity formed under the Racing Industry Act.
I have no racing interests in any code.
I oppose this bill and record my support
for the full content of the GRNZ submission.
However, today I want to focus least on the merits
of Greyhound racing itself
and more on the structural, economic
and constitutional consequences of the bill
as it is currently drafted.
There's a core inconsistency in the bill, which is
that the bill bans,
domestic greyhound racing in New Zealand,
removing about 4,900 races a year from the TAB schedule,
but it does not ban imported greyhound racing.
As a result, the TAB will continue to broadcast
and take bets on around 48,000
overseas Greyhound races every year
overwhelmingly from Australia.
So Greyhound racing is said
to be unacceptable in New Zealand on welfare grounds.
Yet the same activity continues to be promoted, broadcast,
and wagered on simply
because it occurs offshore from jurisdictions
that may have lesser welfare standards than
exist in New Zealand today.
That is not a welfare based reform.
It is a geographic displacement of the activity
with significant unintended consequences.
Removing New Zealand's races
creates a large programming gap.
The gap will not disappear.
It will be filled almost entirely
by Australian greyhound racing.
The practical effects are a substantial economic windfall
for Australian racing bodies,
increased reliance on imported product
and a permanent transfer
of value from New Zealand to Australia.
At the same time, if Greyhound Racing New Zealand is removed
as a recognized code,
the profits generated from Greyhound wagering will be
redistributed to the equine codes.
That is a perverse outcome.
It rewards competing codes that have not been subject
to the same level of welfare scrutiny while stripping the
Greyhound code of funding needed
to meet transition compensation and welfare obligations.
Nothing in the Racing Industry Act requires a code
to conduct domestic races in order
to remain a recognized code.
Codes are governance and regulatory bodies,
not merely race organizers.
There's a clear precedent for this.
During the COVID lockdowns, domestic racing stopped yet,
codes continue to receive
distributions from imported product.
If imported, Greyhound wagering continues,
and GRNZ continues to receive the associated distribution,
that income can be used to fund rehoming
and long-term care properly
and reasonably compensate the affected participants manage
an orderly wind down of assets
and ensure the dogs are supported for life.
If that funding is removed,
the burden will fall either on the crown
or on under-resourced charities with worse welfare outcomes.
Not better. JRNZ is also the recognized constitutional
governing authority for Greyhounds Australasia.
If any New Zealand participant continues to own, breed
or train greyhounds to race in Australia, it's imperative
that there is a regulating body in New Zealand
to oversee any activity that occurs in New Zealand.
The committee essentially has two logically coherent
options, either if Greyhound racing is unacceptable on
welfare grounds, then the bill should ban the importation
of all Greyhound racing,
ban everyone overseas greyhound races,
and prevent the TAB from filling the
gap with Australian product.
That is the only option fully consistent
with the bill stated rationale or option B.
If imported greyhound racing continues,
then Greyhound racing New Zealand should remain the
recognized code under the Racing Industry Act.
GRNZ should continue
to receive the TAB distribution attributable
to Greyhound wagering,
and that funding should be used for welfare,
rehoming compensation and transition.
For as long as imported racing continues,
anything else produces distorted incentives
and poor welfare outcomes.
I want to turn briefly to the provisions
that forcibly dissolve Greyhound racing in New Zealand
and its member clubs as incorporated societies
and have all the assets seized by the crown.
This is unprecedented and a serious overreach.
GRNZ is lawful solvent compliant and functioning.
The Incorporated Societies Act already provides clear
mechanisms for amendment of objects restructuring
and voluntary wind up by members.
This bill bypasses that framework
and dissolves a compliance society by legislative fear
that is totally unnecessary to end racing prohibiting.
The activity is sufficient if that is what you choose to do.
A forced solution interferes with Freedom
of Association under Section 17 of the New Zealand Bill
of Rights Act that overrides longstanding common law
protections for voluntary associations.
It ignores the legislation design advisory committee
legislation guidelines against targeted
legislative intervention.
And it sets a dangerous precedent
if Parliament can dissolve a lawful society simply
because its purpose has become politically inconvenient.
No voluntary organization is truly secure.
JRNZ can perfectly lawfully continue to exist
to manage welfare obligations.
Compensation repurpose itself
or wind up, wind up voluntarily destroying the entity,
adds no public benefit.
In conclusion, this bill is drafted bans.
Domestic Greyhound racing allows imported racing to flourish
transfers value offshore redistributes profits
to competing codes and unnecessarily dismantles.
A lawful civil society organization respectfully submit
that either imported Greyhound racing must also be banned,
or if imported racing continues,
GNZ must remain the recognized code under the Racing
Industry Act and receive the associated distribution.
In either case, the forced dissolution
provisions should be removed.
Parliament may choose to prohibit greyhound racing,
but that choice does not require abandoning sound policy
design, constitutional principles
or basic fairness. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Um,
I have questions from Rachel and then from Steve.
Thank you Chair. Um, thank you Sean for your submission.
I'm just interested in the, uh, transfer of, um,
revenue from imported codes to GRNZ.
I guess you've talked about, you mentioned that
that could be used, uh, to, um, uh, uh,
support rehoming costs in the care and transition costs.
I guess would you see that as being time limited?
Um, because obviously if the band goes ahead,
there'll be a point where, um,
there won't be such a high need for, you know, rehoming
of dogs once, because obviously we've gotta have a big spike
in dogs being re-homed
and it will, you know, there'll be a point where that level
of need is no longer required.
So just interested in whether you would see that
as being something that was transitional or permanent.
And if it was permanent, you know, once we are three
or four years in, um, what would you use that money for?
Um, yeah. Well, it, it depends, I suppose.
Um, ultimately it's up to the members,
what the organization does.
If it came to the end of the time
and there was no need for funding, um,
then the members may choose to wind up the organization.
The point is that if the imported racing continues,
the profit shouldn't go to the equine codes.
Um, it should either be applied to the benefit
of greyhound racing or not at all.
Thank you, Steve.
No, I had a very similar question
and, um, I think you made it pretty clear.
Um, I, I feel that we're acutely aware of the hypocrisy
of what's been proposed by continuing
to import value from the Australian industry.
Um, and then the only other issue would be, well,
I mean there are many issues obviously,
but, um, the, the other thing
that I think you're making a compelling case for,
and I don't need to ask you a question on it, is the freedom
of association point
and the, you know, the fact that this is a legal industry
and what are the precedents for this being shut down
by legislative fiat.
I think the committee is acutely aware
of these, uh, questions.
So they'll be taken well into account now. Deliberations.
Thank you. Thank you Steve. And thank you very much, Sean.
That was a very insightful and well informed submission.
Thank you. Thank you. Okay,
we now have the R-S-P-C-A
for 10 minutes, Anya
and Allison. I got that right.
It's Thank Test.
Thank you. The floor is
Thank you.
Thank you very much for the opportunity
to present today to you.
Um, I'm Dr. AA Dale.
I'm the Chief Scientific Officer for the SBCA.
And this is my colleague Dr. Allison Gown.
Um, sorry, I'm a scientific officer.
Um, the SBCA has spent more than a decade trying to work
with the greyhound racing industry to improve welfare.
We sat on the Greyhound, um, health
and welfare committee for years.
We provided feedback on industry policies
and procedures, rules and standards,
and engaged in good faith for many years, as we do
with all other industries as well, that use animals.
But after years of ongoing welfare concerns
and systemic failures to deliver lasting improvement,
we concluded that the only way
to protect greyhounds was actually to seek a, um,
a ban on commercial greyhound racing.
So the SBCA strongly supports this bill
and the closure of commercial
greyhound racing in New Zealand.
We support the Bill's three stage framework
and a fixed end date of the 1st of August, 2026
because certainty is essential for responsible transition.
And because every extra month
of delay means more drugs will be exposed to avoidable risk.
Okay. And look, we want to be really clear here.
This is not about attacking individual people.
Uh, we know there are passionate people involved in the
industry who care about their dogs deeply,
and we've heard from some of them today,
and we acknowledge that this decision is difficult
and emotional for many people, uh,
particularly those whose livelihoods are dependent,
uh, and tied to racing.
And we also recognize that people have very strong feelings
about what should happen next.
But we are also cognizant
that the public expects policy decisions
to reflect the views of independent knowledgeable experts
and the general public over those
with a commercial interest.
SBCA believes that decisions must prioritize the welfare
of greyhounds, and that means closure must not be delayed.
The band was very clearly signposted
after three independent reviews.
The industry has been on notice since 2021
with the then Minister of Racing
and the then Associate Minister of Animal Welfare indicating
that closure was an option.
Following the announcement, SPA offered the assistance
to the then Greyhound racing New Zealand CEO and Welfare,
and also their welfare manager for contingency planning
in the event of closure.
And after the bill was, was announced,
the industry was given a further 20 month wind down period
with just six months left.
It is not clear if the industry has taken any meaningful
steps to reduce risk, um, or wind down racing.
So when we hear calls to extend the closure date, we'd like
to refer the committee to the
March, 2023 supplementary report from the RIB
where they coed
that a longer transition period would result in an increase
in injury rates due
to the reduced investment in track maintenance
and over racing as the population of racing dog declines.
So pushing out the closure rate closure date would not
reduce the risk, it would increase and prolong it.
And some people have presented to the committee,
have proposed that racing could continue on straight tracks
only, and we acknowledge
that straight track racing reduces injuries,
but it does not eliminate them
and it does not address the other concerns tied to, uh,
transparency, data recording and other welfare concerns.
Straight track racing was recommended in the 2017
Hanson report, but the first
and only straight track, uh,
in New Zealand was not operational until 2024,
which was seven years later.
Even now, only about 5%
of race starts are on straight tracks.
And that matters because it shows
that straight tracks are not a genuine alternative
that is ready to replace the current system.
It's an 11th hour proposal
that has not been delivered at scale,
even when the industry has had years to do so.
And the public is also not asking for this compromise.
And I see you're looking, we will hand these over this from
our survey that was done in 2024.
So also provide that in a 2024 survey, only 2%
of the public supported commercial greyhound racing
continuing on straight tracks
that's lower than the percentage of people
who supported the status quo.
It is not a viable alternative.
Excuse me, if I could just interrupt you for a sec,
because Mike's got a suck on that specific Yes,
of course. Thank you. Just on that,
How, how many people were surveyed for that?
Uh, I can provide you with the full report.
It's a representative sample of the New Zealand public
that was balanced against the census data.
So, so it's from a market research company, 500.
It's around a thousand thousand. It's around a thousand.
It's re sample. Yeah. And it was
Permission, just a question in terms of, um, sorry
to interrupt your submission.
Yes. But, um, you know, we've heard some quite conflicting,
um, from different submitters about the evidence
and there's been a change from certain points in time.
Um, how the questions
or the people that, um, replied to that,
how informed were they about changes within the sector?
So we did two surveys
and obviously we have more things to get through,
so I'll, I'll try and keep this concise.
We did two surveys, one in 2020, uh, two and one in 2024.
People's, um, concerns were consistent
and people referred to, um, reports in the media, um,
of high profile welfare concerns of drug, um, exposures.
Um, so while they may not be people
who are directly involved in the industry, they're aware
through their consumption of that.
Sorry, the, just the, the question, sorry, was just to
how well informed were those people of the changes
or the improvements that have been made within the sector
versus what was out there circulating in media?
Um, I can provide you with the full survey, um,
once we've consent it.
Thank you. Thank you. Uh, please bear in mind
that we are getting close to your time.
So we are, so we're trying to get through,
we've got people wanting to ask questions, so thank you.
So it would be a responsible to invest in new infrastructure
to prop up an industry.
This in decline globally.
Last week, the Scottish government back
to ban on Greyhound Racing Wales has announced a ban full
on New Zealand's announcement.
The USA has a federal bill under consideration.
Several New Zealand, Seth Wales, uh, sorry,
new South Wales tracks have scheduled to close this year.
And the Tasmanian government has committed
to phasing out Greyhound racing entirely by 2029.
And to clarify that closure date, it, uh, is to do
with the expiry of a 20 year funding commitment
that was signed in 2009, not re-homing constraints
and not to allow the industry time to wind down.
So in terms of cons, uh, compensation
and discussions around fairness,
because there's been a lot of those, I just want to clarify
that of course, the primary, um,
production committee will be aware
that when the battery cage came into effect,
there was no compensation.
Likewise, when the live live export ban came into effect,
no compensation, likewise, legislation stores.
So just, I think it's really important.
Our farming community is incredibly important,
and I would like to have fair
and equitable treatment of that,
but saying that we are not opposed in principle
to compensation for industry participants at all,
particularly, um, from our perspective,
the Greyhound welfare must come first.
Okay. We have still four minutes, I believe,
and we still have some points that we'd really like to make.
Okay. That's all right. Madam Chair. Yeah.
We want to emphasize the importance
of traceability being appropriately funded
and resourced in an RB decision this week,
which I won't go into detail on a count of time.
Um, two dogs who did not receive the required dentals
nor des sexing disappeared through private rehoming.
We support the idea that some industry kennels may help has
dogs during the transition,
but only where it's safe and appropriate.
And that means people who haven't had proven charges
of animal welfare, um, banned substances,
traceability or misconduct.
We also support the work
of existing greyhound rehoming agencies,
and we commend their dedicated work.
And so finally, we support an amendment to allow RAB, um,
transitional jurisdiction over integrity issues that come
for 1st of August.
Um, and while racing continues, safeguards are needed
to prevent risk of harm escalating in the coming months.
This includes closing the loophole
to allow greyhounds in the rehoming system to return
to racing, setting maximum ages
and protections for injured greyhounds.
So this bill is an opportunity for New Zealand
to deliver a transparent welfare focus transition away from
commercial greyhound racing
and the SBCA urges the Committee to police support it
and keep the end date firm.
Thank you very much. Thank you
very much for your submission.
Can, can we keep this really quickly
and then we might get to both of you guys, cam,
please. And then Steve,
Uh, really quickly then, um, what,
what role does SPCA see it, uh, itself
as having, uh, in this process?
Um, so Going forward,
Yeah. Thank you. Cameron.
SPCA continues to stand ready
to assist in any capacity with rehoming,
but we do understand and respect their strong feelings.
Um, so we are ready and committed
to work constructively, whatever that may look like. Would
You, would you be a part of a kindling agency
with rehoming services?
If, if that was a desire
and everyone agree, we would be more than happy to do so,
or just to provide our rather extensive foster network so
that the greyhounds could be fostered?
Anything that we can do to help, we are very happy
To. Final question,
um, chair, if I may really quickly,
would you be able to provide this committee with, um, data
that the SBCA has on, uh, the euthanasia versus how many,
uh, rehoming you're able to achieve every year?
So with all due respect, we are, um, an agency that deals
with, for the most part, neglect
and abused animals. Um, and so,
But I think it's, it's not a disrespectful question.
I'm just trying to ascertain how much the
Answer.
Yeah. Can we hear the answer? Yeah.
So we don't have the data for you today,
and we would question the relevance.
Asya said, we deal with dogs that have been subjected
to severe neglect and abuse. The
Relevance is about the capacity of the system.
Can I, may I answer the question?
I'd love to hear the answer. Um, thank you.
I'm sure that the people in the room today supporting the
greyhound racing industry would like
to say their dogs have not been subjected
to severe cruelty and neglect.
And there are cases where dogs have been,
where it is the kindest thing to euthanize them,
and that is the context in which
euthanasia decisions are made.
But the relevance to this, um, we struggle
to see is we do not breed dogs for entertainment.
Thank you,
Madam Chair. Okay.
Uh, so all I can suggest Mr.
LA is that you, um, put forward a written question,
but I'm sorry, Steve, we're out of time.
Madam Chair. Can I request, uh,
that the committee consider slightly extending for SPCA,
given they're the biggest animal welfare agency in the
country, and it's seems relevant
to get some other information from 'em if, if possible.
And three questions.
I second that because I've got questions
and there's been a lot of, you know,
comments made about 'em today, and I think they have,
the opport should have the opportunity in front
of the committee to answer questions. They
Wanted more time. Madam
Chair. They should have applied before the, like other
Well, it's, it's not them asking time, Mr.
Chair. It's members of the committee asking
for more time. We're
Already behind time, Steve,
Uh, and Madam Chair, it's normal. I give the
First Question to the opposition,
and you gave three questions
to the government side and none to us.
Yeah. And there's a 10 minute break.
I'm happy to forego it so
that we can hear from the SBPA look.
I, I think, I think that that, that it was clear what amount
of time they had at the, at the start of the proceedings.
I'm happy to let it go for another one question,
but I think that it was, yeah,
it was very clear from we start
of proceedings 5% to the government.
Can I speak to that Much?
I, I think if you look at how it's gone so far,
I've been very fair in the division of questions.
Yeah. But that's not on this organization.
And I was also, I also pointed out to both the submitters
that they were running out of time
and the committee, we had a lot a lineup of questions,
so they were well aware of that.
They presented a very detailed submission,
which we had all read and was taken as read,
and a lot of that was repeated in what was said.
So one more question and then we're done. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Madam Chair.
Um, my question is this, um,
it's very clear from your submission
that you want the closing date to stay in August,
but we've repeatedly asked of the industry
who clearly don't want the industry to be shut down.
What would be an optimal close down process if it is going
to be, would you consider
that there was some value in extending that shutdown period?
If it meant a significant improvement from a point of view
of a non-ideal situation for that industry in terms
of their ability to feel like they've had enough time?
Like another year
May answer to be very brief.
Uh, no. Uh,
and that is due to considerations around welfare.
Okay. Thank you. An extension, please.
Okay. Thank you very much.
Okay. We now have Mr. Donald Arthur by Zoom.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Uh, I'm a retired veterinarian living near Lincoln.
My interest in Greyhound racing was sparked in 2012,
where my daughter worked a summer job and done sandal.
Yeah. Uh, for Greyhound Hall of Fame trainer, Ray C**k.
Hey, excuse me, Donald,
can I just interrupt you for one second?
I'm not sure if you're intending to have your camera on
and on or off, but it's currently off.
Oh, okay. If you want us to see you,
if you've pushed the little, the video
icon will be able to see you.
It should be a little video camera icon on your screen
somewhere with a line through it.
If you click on that, it should turn your camera on.
If not, uh, oh, no, he, I, no.
Oops, I wrong our, our end.
It's so it must be his internal,
I think now he's completely turned himself off.
Is he? Ah, here we go.
I think might
Hello Donald?
Hello. Oh, hi.
We can't, we can hear you,
but we can't see you, but that's fine.
Please go if you are happy with, thank you.
Uh, yeah, thanks for the opportunity to talk.
Um, my interest in Greyhound racing was sparked in 2012 when
my daughter worked a summer job in Dun sandal
for Greyhound Hall of Fame trainer Ray Adcock.
I was immediately impressed with Ray's facilities
and the dogs were getting ultrasound, laser
and massage therapy to assist post-race recovery
and also received daily grooming and regular water baths.
He had more equipment
for treating his greyhound athletes than
we had in our vet clinic.
I said to Ray, I was interested in thoroughbred racing
and breeding, but he found my wife
and I at Greyhound b***h in
Australia called Minnie's Fantasy.
After Minnie retired from racing, Ray convinced us
to start breeding with her Minnie's fantasy,
and her descendants have left a long line
of exceptional progeny resulting in her being awarded
A-G-R-M-Z Special Achievement Award in 2022.
That year, her daughters produced the winners
of the New Zealand Derby and New Zealand Oaks.
One of her other daughters produced a dog called Postman,
pat, new Zealand's highest ever earning Greyhound.
He won over $600,000 competing successfully at the
highest level in Australia.
If Greyhound racing is shut down in New Zealand,
is it important we are allowed to export these bloodlines
to Australia, or they will be lost forever?
Ray and I often discussed Greyhound and racehorse welfare.
One day, Ray asked me a very good question.
He said, it is, is it more natural for humans
to sit on the back of prey animals with a whip in hand
or let a predator bread for chasing go
after an artificial lure without any human interference?
Ray passed away in 2021 at age 87.
He was still training dogs at the time, demonstrating
how much he loved his dogs and what they do.
He also loved to share his passion
with the younger generation.
Our current trainer, Dylan Voice, one
of Ray's former employees, is one of Ray's former employees,
Dylan 30 years old,
and his partner Claire, trained from Jack Hart
and Kirsty Taylor's property at Jack.
Also a Greyhound trainer is another one of Ray's pupils
and has been involved in the industry for over 40 years.
Jack and Kirsty spent over a hundred thousand dollars on new
kennels just a few months
before the proposed ban was announced.
My wife and I own about 30 greyhounds, including race dogs
and breeding b*****s.
We also own several straws of frozen seamen, some
of which have been imported from Australia.
We estimate the total value
of these dogs in semen is about $350,000.
My written submission focuses on animal welfare,
which is obviously my area of expertise.
I believe the welfare standards in Greyhound racing are
higher than any other animal industry in New Zealand.
The welfare argument for banning
greyhound racing makes no sense to me.
Maureen Pugh asked a very good question at
last Thursday's hearings.
She said, what is the problem this bill is trying to solve?
I hope one day the Minister
of Racing will answer that question.
If he can take the time to speak with GRNZ.
I suspect the problem has nothing to do
with greyhound racing, but is about
supporting thoroughbred racing.
A community where the minister has many supporters.
I also love thoroughbred racing,
but it should be funded from horse wagering
and not from dog wager.
As it stands, the proposed bill is causing significant
distress in the Greyhound community.
If passed, it will certainly cause further
mental health issues.
It will also result in significant negative economic
consequences extending well beyond GRNZ license holds.
I believe the bill should not be passed
for all the reasons we have heard
the most important being the harm it will cause
by taking away the ability of young people to earn a living.
People like Dylan and Claire, Jack
and Kirsty, thank you for your time.
Happy to answer any questions.
Oh, thank you very much.
And I have a question from Miles Anderson.
Thank you for your submission, Donald. Up.
We heard from the previous submitters their reason, um,
for supporting the ban was around, um, um,
animal welfare concerns.
So how can we as a committee, um, work out
which lot of experts, um, to, um,
agree with or which lot of experts,
uh, speaking the truth,
Uh, I just, I guess you've gotta, um,
just weigh up all the evidence.
You can, um, I think GRNZ
and their presentation, uh, be able
to give you some more information.
Um, yeah, I think, um,
I mean personally, I think the SBCA come at this from
a very narrow perspective.
Okay. Thank you. Thank you very much Donald.
Thanks for your time.
Okay. Okay.
We've now got Mark Berg from
Zoom on Zoom
for the best coffee in Nui.
And my zoom's just gone down. Here we go.
Sorry about that. Alright. Have you got me
Great location for your Zoom? Um,
It is. I thought it must well
be a racetrack.
Okay. We have 10 minutes mark. So the floor is yours.
If we, if you just please try
and allow some time for questions at
the end, that would be fantastic. Thank
You. Absolutely. Uh, good
afternoon committee and Madam Chair.
Uh, my name is Mark Berg
and I'm the central district's Gray Hound racing
manager, and I oppose the bill.
Um, my background is,
I've had two years in this current role,
but I'd stress, this is my personal, uh, submission.
My experience of greyhounds started at age
of 10 when I held my, uh, trainer's handlers license, sorry,
and assisted with my parents' dogs
who were trainers at the time.
That's where my love of greyhounds was formed.
I've been a board member of the, uh,
wary Jockey Club for over a decade.
Um, so I have cross code experience and understanding.
I'm a longstanding owner
of race horses racing Greyhounds also own a bija freeze,
a Labradoodle, a street cat,
and the Bijan Freeze has required $8,000 in leg surgery
despite never racing.
I'd like to bring us to the impact of, uh,
the proposed ban on the central districts.
I've been grateful that mps Carl Bates
and Sue Red Main have taken the time to meet with me to try
and understand the impact from a regional level.
I feel it's not up to this point of this process
that it could take any shape, form,
or relevance, um,
that all the cards can get out there on the table
and, um, can start to see some pathways
within the central districts.
The estimated approximate revenue loss is 44 $4 million.
There is no alternative to this
that just vanishes straight out of our, uh, communities.
For Wang Yui, the loss is estimated to be around 20 million
and part of the social fabric of our society.
Wnu, uh, Greyhound Racing Club has approximately 15 staff
serviced by 75 suppliers and contractors.
And this would also fit the w Jockey Club,
who's a long time supporter of, uh, ground racing.
They'll lose rental income, um, that directly contributes
to the maintenance facilities used by the wider community.
Um, the Mandatory Harness Racing Club will also lose our
rental income and the Palms North Greyhound Racing Club,
uh, which has 15 staff and approximately 40 suppliers.
Contractors, um, will also lose
that money into their community.
Just like to quickly bring it to staff
and officials, uh, who run the race meeting.
So running for race meeting takes 30 to 40 skilled people,
um, including remote TAB staff and on-course cameras.
These are highly trained specialized roles.
Uh, without the constancy of Greyhound racing, many
of these people would not find, uh, equivalent employment.
Um, and I suspect personally there may be some
deficits in staffing thoroughbreds and Harness
because these people, uh, rely on the consistency
of the Greyhound income.
Uh, as for the trainers
and um, participants
as the central district's Greyhound Racing Manager, um,
I support clubs and trainers, um, with operational concerns
and, uh, resolving any issues.
Since the ban was announced, my role has somewhat changed
to being a more of a counselor supporting trainers
and staff under significant stress,
uncertainty, Financial pressure,
and the sudden loss of their vocation.
Participants have, uh, invested heavily in welfare,
including kennels and operational infrastructure.
Many of these investments cannot be repurposed,
and the government has made, uh,
no under guidance on compensation for these losses Publicly.
Labeling us as sin as despite welfare concerns
and standards being met is deeply unfair.
Uh, just quickly to the infrastructure
and safety, significant progress has been
made, uh, with the track safety.
Um,
You Would never believe the amount of hours
that go into this track
and the, the readings in behind the data that is collected.
Um, I myself have spent a lot of time helping develop
how the straight track races,
and that's a constantly I involving beast in terms
of how it functions.
Uh, quickly to rehoming, um,
Greyhound racing New Zealand has invested heavily
in rehoming initiatives.
Transferring this responsibility
outside this organization risks the welfare of the dogs
as participants are the most likely experienced
and, uh, best equipped
to understand their real homing needs.
The issue of compensation must be addressed at the very
least, investment to the trainers, recognition
or appropriate compensation as a deal with the transition
of having generated, um, no income generated from racing
overseas, racing broadcasts overseas, uh,
overseas racing broadcasts continue
and waged on in New Zealand.
It's difficult to argue.
The domestic ban is generally about animal welfare
and raises serious questions about the motivations
of the proposed closure.
In summary, the economic
and social effect has, um,
it's not really been fully thought out,
the welfare improvements made by trainers GRN said,
demonstrate the industry has already exceeded
some aspirational goals.
If closure proceeds,
participants must have fair compensation, um,
and loss of income and infrastructure.
The transition period must allow
for rehoming greyhounds safely and responsibly.
Uh, the proposed ban
and to summarize the proposed ban, will not only, uh,
destroyed livelihoods, livelihoods, regional economies,
but also risk of preparative army, the welfare of dogs,
and the broader racing community.
Thank you for your time.
Thank you very much. Mark, we just have time
for one quick question if anyone's got a question.
That was a very comprehensive summary though. Thank you.
Sorry about that. That's great.
All good. Thank you very much.
Thank you. See you soon. Bye. Yeah.
Okay. We are now at Christine.
Oh, Mark Bradshaw on Zoom. Does that sound right? Yes.
And hi, mark. Good day.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select committee.
Thank you. Um, you have a 10 minute slot now,
and, um, yeah, if you could try
and leave some time for questions
at the end, that would be fantastic.
But the floor is yours.
Thank you. Thank you. My name is Mark Bradshaw,
my wife Christine and I
run a small native plant nursery on my father's property
just outside Rangi, north Canterbury.
My parents purchased this property in 1979,
and I have lived here ever since.
We built a home, established our business,
and raised our two children here.
Our daughter Ashley, and her partner Pete,
have also established a business
and are now raising a family here on the property as well.
Our daughter, Ashley, became involved
with Greyhounds at the age of 13 when she secured a job
with a neighbor from the outset.
Her dedication and commitment to the dogs was evident
when she later decided that she wanted to breed
and raise Greyhounds herself.
We supported her in every way we could.
While this initially involved some financial assistance,
the far greater contribution has been hundreds of hours
of work to construct kennels
and the specialized infrastructure required
to operate a compliant greyhound racing business.
Approximately 12 years ago, Ashley partnered with Pete,
and together they continue to expand
and improve their business, their work ethics.
Long hours and commitment inspired my wife
and I to continue supporting them as their enterprise grew
and the hundreds of ours became thousands of hours invested.
In September, 2021, the industry was put on notice
and participants made significant investments
to improve the facilities in good faith.
Having been told by the previous racing minister
that they would face closure
unless they ensure better welfare
standards for their greyhounds.
Ashley and Pete belong to a community of people
who have built their businesses within the most tightly
regulated and closely monitored animal waste industry in the
country, an industry which has invested heavily in recent
years to improve welfare standards
and outcomes for their greyhounds.
The industry funded rehoming program
and the Rehab to Rehome scheme are great examples of this.
They have done this while enduring years of abuse
and bullying from animal rights activists,
disgruntled punters,
and most recently from their own racing minister,
who publicly described industry participants
as offenders and sinners.
Undeserving of compensation for now decimated investments.
It was apparent to me that many of the trainers
who spoke on Thursday do not understand
how a small business is property valued
and have significantly underestimated
what their businesses were worth prior
to the minister's announcement of closure.
Businesses may be valued in several ways based on stock
and plant or assets.
Annual turnover, annual profit will sometimes a
combination of these factors.
In the case of a liquidation scenario,
which is probably the most relevant here if the industry
should close, and an asset based approach is most common
and probably the easiest to apply
these assets include everything
that has been done on the property
to facilitate the greyhounds from housing
and equipment to the specialized fencing
and track surface and costs.
Importantly, these assets also include the individual value
of each dog owned by the business immediately prior
to the minister's shock announcement.
Compensation touse participants should not be a burden on
the New Zealand tax payer,
as the minister implied in his outrageous sinner statement
that should be funded out
of the imported racing revenue from Greyhound racing from
Australia, New Zealand,
Greyhound racing is being shut down allegedly due
to consistently high injury rates.
According to the racing minister,
the RIB quarterly report given to the minister prior
to the closure announcement clearly states
that New Zealand's injury rates are within industry norms
when compared to the Australian jurisdictions.
New Zealand has the Rehab to Rehome program,
which Australia does not have,
and has better rehoming outcomes than the Australian
industry should by now be abundantly clear
to committee members that there is in fact no animal welfare
crisis within the New Zealand greyhound racing industry.
I do not believe that the racing minister himself was
gullible enough to believe the propaganda from the animal
rights activist, but is utilizing this as an excuse
to shut down the local industry so
that he can redirect the revenue from Australian greyhound
racing into the horse industry
of which he's well known to be fond of.
And according to public records,
whose members contribute greatly to his campaign funds.
In a speech on the 22nd of January, 2024,
the minister stated that he wants to double the number
of Thoroughbreds Britain in New Zealand
and increase the international profile.
I think we can all work out where the funding
for this is going to come from.
I'm disgusted by the racing minister's neglectful behavior
and flippant, derogatory comments about the good hardworking
people in this industry.
We call ourselves a free and fair democracy,
and I believe that small business owners
around the country would be horrified to think that years
of hard work and investment
to build up their businesses could be wiped out overnight
by changing legislation without regard for compensation.
For the minister to say that these hardworking kiwis have
offended and are sinners should not receive any compensation
as slanderous and a disgraceful reflection
on the New Zealand government.
Said my piece.
Objection. Thank you very much, mark.
It's much appreciated. D do you just No.
Um, are there any questions,
members? No,
No, I understand.
We've got Ashley next. Is that right?
Yep, that's right. Yep. So
Are you in and out or are you swapping chairs?
Um, we can swap chairs. That's easy enough. Yep.
Thank you very much. Welcome. Um,
Ashley, welcome to the Primary
Production Select committee.
I understand you've got 10 minutes, um,
and if you could leave some time for questions,
if there are any from the members, that would be great.
But the floor's, yours. Good
Afternoon chair and members of the committee.
My name is Ashley Bradshaw and I oppose the ban.
I've been involved in the greyhound racing
industry for over 20 years.
I started as a teenager with an afterschool job,
and over time I went on to breed
and train my own racing dogs.
I wanted to speak here and stay strong,
but this last week I've been reminded
that we are all sinners.
I've read comments online saying
that I should be euthanized,
and I've been told by someone in this industry
that it would be easier to die.
These are not things I want to read.
They're not thoughts I want my friends to carry,
and they're not words I want our children to hear.
This is the reality faced by an industry
that has continually improved, continually adapted
yet is really given the chance to be heard.
Just over five years ago, I submitted a proposal
to Greyhound Racing New Zealand.
Shortly after the rehab to rehab, pro rehab
to Rehome program was created.
This program allows greyhounds injured on a racing facility
to immediately access fully funded,
specialized veterinary treatment,
rehabilitation and recovery.
And it is, this is the program I
want to talk to you about today.
Let me tell you about we Ila.
Ila arrived into care with what was thought
to be a broken leg supported by a splint.
X-rays later revealed a fractured tibia,
multiple fractures in her pore,
already showing signs of healing.
This meant she had been injured for some time,
but Isla is not a dog from the Greyhound racing industry.
She is a 12 week old puppy. She has been failed by many.
She was flowing from a north island shelter
to a Christchurch rescue
to receive the care she desperately needed.
We will never know how long Isla have waited in pain,
how long she laid, injured,
while her fractures slowly healed on their own.
And sadly, this is not uncommon in the world
of unregulated companion animals.
Now let me tell you about
what happens in our regulated greyhound racing industry.
Kim was injured at 4:37 PM She received pain relief
and sedation by 4 45, supported immediately by her carers,
stabilized and transported to specialized veterinary care.
Leah injured at 1 52, medicated
and stabilized by two o'clock.
Lucas injured at 6 0 4, medicated and stabilized by six 10.
NAYA injured at 6 27, medicated and stabilized by 6 32.
And every one of these cases, veterinary care,
including pain relief, was provided in under 10 minutes.
These are not exceptions.
This is the standard of care within Greyhound racing in
New Zealand, and the care does not stop there.
Through the Rehab to Rehab program,
these dogs receive fully funded recovery.
They were transferred to specialized facilities,
received additional diagnostics, and had surgeries planned
and completed within days thanks
to the specialist veterinary teams.
JNZ works alongside bandages.
Were removed within days, not weeks, allowing these dogs
to quickly return to what makes them happy.
Some bathing, soft blankets,
gentle walks, treats and comfort.
Less than 10 minutes to receive Vic care, less than 10 days
to return to a good quality of life.
This is what regulation looks like.
This is what accountability looks like,
and this is what we stand to lose.
Some may hear these stories
and focus only on the fact that the injuries occurred,
but in my role as the South Island Rehab
to Rehome Kennel Manager, I saw the entire picture.
Yes, these dogs were injured doing something they loved, but
because of the immediate support system in place,
they were assisted, stabilized,
and made pain-free faster than most companion animals could.
For these dogs rehabilitated exceptionally well, thanks
to their peak levels of fitness
and professional handling from their racing careers.
They passed their re home and assessments with flying colors
and were placed into loving homes
where they now live full happy lives.
Their injuries did not define them.
They did not limit their joy during racing or after it.
Total transparency was asked for.
And so it was given because of this total transparency,
we can now prove our on track euthanasia has been reduced
by 85% and we know our unnecessary euthanasia is zero.
But this total transparency also publishes our total
euthanasia statistics.
A number thrown around without context
to negatively impact our injury.
Our, our industry, sorry, a number
that includes in the 24 25 season, the passing
of my elderly pets, Cadbury de Noso, Zita,
goose, and Tori.
It includes the loss of one of my puppies
during a cesarean and the loss of hiccup.
My dog, who passed during a dental
before moving to his new home this morning.
So far you have heard false stories visitation
to breeding facilities.
We have no specific breeding facilities in New Zealand.
Dogs kept and crates to hide injuries.
Our transparent regulations
and RIB audits prevent this from ever being possible.
And you've also heard a foster care estate a died,
a dog died in her care from neglect.
Although my primary preference is for the industry
to not close, should this continue to be the outcome,
please consider the safety of our historical records,
a potentially small and overlooked aspect, a history
of achievements for our trainers
and video records all located on our racing website
for deeply personal reasons, including my mental health.
I recently stepped away from my role
as the South Island Rehab to Rehome Kennel Manager.
And in doing so, I experienced
what every trainer will soon be forced to face, walking
through empty kennel blocks.
No excited faces waiting for you, no wagging tails,
only silence, heavy, overwhelming, and heartbreaking.
This is not a choice we've made.
This is a wound cut deep by force. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Ashley.
Thank you very much for your submission.
Does any of the members have questions? Oh, miles Anderson.
Yeah. Thank you Ashley. That was a really good submission
and um, gave the committee an understanding,
I guess, of what you are going through.
Um, could you expand a bit on, uh, you were saying
that there had been a number of, um, falsities, I guess,
uh, promoted in some submissions this morning.
Um, how much confidence in the committee have
in your position and,
and in what you are saying when, um,
there are some reasonably, um,
or steer groups, I suppose are telling us something else?
Could you please repeat your question?
Sorry. So how much confidence can the committee have
with you saying
that there are very high standards welfare wise when we've
had a number of submitters this morning, particularly, um,
the, um, SBCA telling us that that is not the case.
Our standards are all published.
They can be viewed online.
We have higher standards than that of any industry.
We have higher animal welfare standards than that
of any pet industry.
Um, simply put, there's no regulation around any other,
um, dog ownership in particular in New Zealand
and our standards can all be viewed.
Thank you. Thanks Ashley.
Are there any further questions, members?
Oh, thank you very much for your time, Ashley,
and for taking the time to present
to us today. Much appreciated.
Thank you. Okay.
We're actually managed to catch up on our time
and we now have may cut as May Cutler here.
Yes, you are. Fantastic it.
Thank you, Mai
Uh, you just have to forgive me here.
I'm a bit nervous and I'm not a very good public speaker.
All right.
Uh, good afternoon.
My name is May Cutler and I'm 31 years old and I'm from ua.
And I'm here because I strongly oppose this proposed bill.
I am not here just as a submitter, that as someone
who lives this work every single day, someone whose time,
energy, and heart are deeply tied to these greyhounds,
this proposed band will affect alongside my partner Lum.
I've spent many years working across both racing
and Rehoming, and I currently serve as the kennel manager
for great mates around Europe.
Before the Great Mates program existed,
I also worked directly with Greyhound's Pets, serving
as the Rehoming Kennel Manager.
My experience in Rehoming
therefore spans multiple frameworks and organizations
and stages of the industry.
I do not speak from theory or distance.
I speak from a lived experience.
We have six retired greyhounds, one legato, and a cat.
I see every day what successful re-homing looks like.
I work alongside collum with the racing greyhounds,
and I see firsthand the time, care, and patience
and commitment that goes into doing this properly.
Rehoming has been a, been a central part
of my life for more than a decade.
For me, rehoming is not the end of a process.
It is a continuation of responsibility.
Many trainers remain in contact
with their retired rehome greyhounds
long after they leave racing.
And that speaks volumes to me.
If a Greyhound is ever returned for any reason,
the Rehoming agency we work with steps back in
and begins the process again.
Our team is available to assist
with reassessments when required, provide advice and support
and help with placements or rematching if needed.
In our world, no Greyhound is left behind.
Each dog is an individual
and requires time assessment, patience, and care.
Rehoming is not just about finding the home,
it is about preparing a greyhound
to su succeed in that home.
I want to share one example that reflects
what this work really looks like.
There was a greyhound named Tilly and Dunedin.
She did not transition easily and at a time and effort,
and people willing to work patiently
with her timid personality
before she found her forever home.
One day, Tilly escaped her home in Dunedin
and went missing for five days with very few sightings.
Our team, alongside others in the Greyhound community,
traveled to Dunedin and actively searched for her.
Over two days, we searched day
and night with little rest covering large areas on foot.
We eventually located Lea after two days of searching,
and we believed that the involvement
of familiar people was critical to her recovery.
Tilly was incredibly spooked,
and it was the presence of familiar faces that allowed her
to feel safe enough to come out of hiding.
We supported both Tilly and her family
and ensure she was safe.
The work was supported by Greyhound racing in New Zealand,
who funded the travel required
and ensured the right people were involved.
So decisions could be made based on what was best for Tilly,
not on convenience or cost.
The work was not convenient or paid,
but it mattered because she mattered.
Tilly's story reflects the reality of Rehoming real people,
real effort, and a shared responsibility
to ensure greyhounds do not fall through the cracks.
Rehoming and New Zealand works
because it is done by many people who know these dogs
often from the very beginning of their lives.
The Great Mates program did not appear overnight.
It was carefully created with structured processes,
individual assessments and systems built from experience.
Greyhounds are not interchangeable,
and that is why the system works.
This proposed ban threatens to dismantle the structure.
It is, it does not just remove racing.
It removes the people with the knowledge
and the systems that ensure greyhounds
attract prepared and rehome safely.
There is also a very real financial
and personal impact that cannot be ignored
if this band proceeds.
We lose two businesses, our racing operation
and our rehoming business both built over many years.
We are young people with specialized skills through,
through years of hands-on regulated work
that is not easily transferable.
Without fair compensation,
families like ours are left carrying the full burden
of a decision we did not create.
This affects my family deeply.
Sorry. It's okay.
Take your time. Yeah.
My daughter, Harper, who is seven years old
and lives in lives
and breathes greyhounds, she has grown up both raising
and rehoming and understands the responsibility that comes
with caring for these dogs.
Her dream was, has always been to do what her parents do
to raise a greyhound and to rehome them properly.
When this band was announced, my first thought was her.
What future disappears? What is taken away from her?
The greyhounds have shaped the way she understands
responsibility, empathy, unconditional love and care.
Oh, they have taught her patience, routine,
and respect for animals.
Losing this isn't, isn't just about a career path.
It's, it's about losing a way of life that has shaped
who she is and who she hoped to become.
If changes are made, they must be made responsibly.
A longer wind down period is critical, not only
for the people, but for the greyhounds themselves.
Trainers need time to responsibly manage dogs
through the reti, through to retirement and re rehabing.
Bases need time to assess and place dogs individually
and without the pressure.
Grey Greyhounds don't all retire at the same stage
or transition at the same pace.
They are routine driven animals.
As racing provides structure,
social development stimulation.
Sudden changes can be stressful for some dogs.
Some need time to decompress
and some need gradual exposure to home environments,
and some require specialized placements.
Longer wind down period allows this work
to happen properly instead of under pressure,
which could lead to failed placements, increased stress
and repeated movement between homes and kettle bases.
And there is, there are only
so many suitable homes in New Zealand.
Greyhound racing in New Zealand must continue overseeing the
re rehoming as it does now.
The structure already exists. The processes already work.
The people involved already know these dogs.
Removing that framework puts every greyhound at risk.
Every submission you have heard
during this process reinforces one truth.
Greyhound welfare works best when it's individualized,
structured, managed by experienced people removing
the great mates framework risk and undo years of progress
and placing greyhounds in exactly the situation this
bell claims to prevent.
Thank you for listening. Thank
You so much. And thank you
for your heartfelt words.
Yeah, you did a great job.
Thank you. Yeah. Um,
are there any questions from any of the members?
Yep. Yes, Mike.
Thank you, chair. Well done.
Um, I just had a couple of questions.
You touched on, um, about the limited
or the capacity for people in New Zealand to, you know,
adopt, you know, rehome Gray.
Yeah. What's your view on that?
Because I guess, you know,
and someone touched on it earlier.
Mm-hmm. You know, it's not just the greyhounds
that people adopt, they adopt 'em from the pounds.
So if there's a big influx of Yeah.
Um, greyhounds, should this come to pass, what are the, uh,
potential animal welfare, um, impacts of that
across all of the dogs here?
Could you see there's a challenge with that.
So Can you repeat that? Sorry. Sorry, I
Just, I I'll try my piece.
I can put It blank there. It was very long-winded.
I'll, I'll Try and I know answering questions could be
a bit of an issue for me, just 'cause I'm so flu.
No, that's right. That's fine.
I'm happy to email many in depth explanations as well.
Yeah. You just touched on about, um,
there's x amount of capacity. Oh, Zealand.
Zealand, two New Zealand. You had to rehome the dogs.
Yeah, it's just during COVID times there was large amounts
of dogs going out into homes and the capacity was there.
And I believe with COVID times happening,
the economies changed quite drastically.
Uh, living expenses have gone up in pricing.
Not everyone can adopt a Greyhound and Yeah.
Limited people in New Zealand as well as,
Yeah. And thank
You. Got time For
one more? Yes. You can have
a sip or is it a new question?
New question. Okay. Be succinct please, Steve.
No, you go quickly and then we'll come to you, Steve. Thank
You. Cheer. Um, may
look, you just touched in here
and, and, and I get it.
Um, it's very real for you and your family. Yeah.
In terms of, you know, you've invested your
life at savings mm-hmm.
In good faith Yeah. To meet certain standards, you know.
Is there anything further you'd like
to say about what that actually means?
Should this cut
Off of what we lose?
Yeah. Well, we have spent a lot of our life savings,
uh, building kettle blocks up to standard
for the greyhound racing in New Zealand
and for our rehoming.
So as our race team, we also need
vehicles for our race teams.
Um, there are so many assets involved to do
with like fencing.
Uh, we've got boring equipment, uh,
exercise equipment and stuff.
So yeah, if this bang goes ahead,
we'll pretty much lose everything
and everything we've put in.
We won't be getting anything out.
Thank you. Um, Steve,
Mine's just a very quick clarification
that it's our understanding
that the transitional agency doesn't intend
to stop the existing rehoming processes that they intend to
continue to rely on those for the rehoming.
That's but a small sal for the overall issues
that you are articulating.
But I just wanted to clarify that.
'cause there seems to be, seems to be some, um, lack
of clarity on that intention.
Okay. Yeah. Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you.
I think Harper can be very proud of me, mom, today.
Well done. Thank you. Okay.
We now have Callum. We
Hi Callum. Hey, how
Are you?
I'm just as nervous as me, so I'll do my best. Okay.
Thank you for allowing me to speak today on an issue
that affects my family, my staff,
and the greyhounds I've dedicated my life to.
My name is Callum Weir.
I'm 38 years old and I'm from ran Europe.
I have been a public greyhound trainer for 18 years,
and together with my partner May Cutler,
I have spent over 10 years running a Greyhound
rehoming preparation kennel.
I strongly oppose this proposed bill.
Greyhounds have been my life since I was a young adult,
not just my job, but my purpose.
Every day, seven days a week for nearly two decades,
my life has revolved around the care, health,
and wellbeing of these greyhounds.
My dad has been and always will be my biggest supporter.
Both of my parents actively help
wherever possible in the kennels.
Many years ago, they sold what was meant
to be their future retirement home to purchase
and financially set up the property we all live and work on.
To this day, they did this out of love
so I could live my dream.
I am forever grateful for what they have sacrificed,
but now I carry the burden of knowing
that they could lose everything if
this proposed bill goes ahead.
Over the past 10 years, my partner
and I have helped prepare greyhounds
that have left our kennels healthy, socialized,
and ready to be loved as family pets.
That does not happen by accident.
It happens because of structure, regulation, accountability,
and the people who care deeply.
The welfare standards in Greyhound racing today are not
with it what they were many years ago.
I have seen the industry change rapidly and decisively.
Track standards have improved.
Veterinary oversight is constant.
Injuries are reported and investigated.
Greyhounds track for life, rehoming is no longer optional.
It is expected and enforced. Greyhound racing.
New Zealand has built one
of the strongest welfare frameworks in the world.
It continues to evolve through ongoing reviews, regulations,
and investments with a clear focus on improving outcomes
for greyhounds across every stage of their lives.
One greyhound I trained named Swimming goat is not just a
name in a race book to me.
He is part of our family.
He won 22 races in a row,
and every one of those wins came from his love of racing.
You could feel it when you handled him.
The excitement, the confidence, the happiness he had, doing
what he was born to do.
No one ever had to force him to race.
Racing was something he wanted.
Racing, gave him purpose and a joy.
For many years now, swimming goat has been retired
and lives inside our home with us.
He sleeps near the kids, follows us from room to room,
and has settled into family pet life
like he has always belonged there.
Watching him now calm and content,
I know his life has been fulfilled, not just just
after racing, but because of it.
He is living proof that a greyhound can love racing
and still have a happy, safe,
deeply loved life after it ends.
My partner, my parents
and I have put our life savings into making sure our kennels
exceed the highest welfare standards in New Zealand.
We built them with the greyhounds in mind.
Not for profit, but for their comfort, their routine,
their enrichment, their safety.
We do not clock off at five. We do not get weekends.
We work seven days a week every day of the year
because of greyhounds rely on us.
If this proposed bill goes ahead,
my family will lose two businesses.
Our racing kennels and our rehoming preparation kennels.
I have four children who rely on this income
and on the stability This work provides.
The economic impact on family like mine is enormous.
But beyond the financial loss, there is something deeper.
The mental health impact on this proposed
bill has already been felt.
The constant uncertainty, the fear of losing everything.
We have worked for over decades,
and the feeling of being judged
and dismissed despite doing everything asked of us.
This is taking a real toll on trainers,
kennel, staff, and families.
We also employ people for full-time staff
and two part-time staff.
A bill of this kind means those people lose their jobs.
It means more families under stress
and more livelihoods destroyed.
Removing a regulated industry does not improve welfare.
It removes oversight,
accountability in the very people responsible for caring
for these greyhounds every single day.
If the industry is dismantled, the structure
that ensures greyhounds attract, supported
and rehome disappears, the people
with the knowledge and experience are gone.
That does not protect greyhounds, that puts 'em at risk.
This industry is not perfect, but it is improving
because of regulation transparency
and people who have adapted again
and again to meet higher standards.
I'm proud of what I have achieved, proud
of the greyhounds we have raised
and proud of the greyhounds.
We have helped. If this bill is to proceed,
must include a five year stage wind down period
and fair compensation over people's assets
so businesses can close responsibly, staff can be supported,
and families have a realistic opportunity
to find alternative income.
I'm asking you respectfully
and sincerely not to erase an industry
that is doing the work, not to punish families
who have done everything required of them,
and not to dismantle a system that protects thousands
of greyhounds across New Zealand.
Let us continue improving.
Let us continue caring
and let us continue doing the work
that actually protects the greyhounds.
Thank you for listening.
Thank you very much. Are there any questions, members?
No. Thank you. And thank you for sharing your story.
It's a, it's really important for us to hear the social
and the, um, the real family side of it too.
So thank you very much for that.
Um, right, we have Emma
Reddy ready
online. Hi Emma.
Hi, how are you? Very well, thank you.
You have 10 minutes.
Excellent. So my name is Emma Reddy.
I'm currently the on track veterinarian at
the Christchurch Greyhound.
That's, we are about a third
of all Greyhound racing has taken place.
I've worked there for four years.
Prior to that, I was a regulatory veterinarian at NPI,
but most of my career was as an equine vet in Christchurch.
As far as I'm aware, I'm the only race day vet
that covers greyhounds,
but can cover both horse codes as well.
When people have asked me what I do for a living,
I tell them my job and then I quickly follow up
with a description to overcome their preconceptions.
I describe that I check every dog at the races
and then recheck something
after they race, mostly only as a precaution.
I tell them I'm in a privileged position that all the costs
of the medical, all the dog's medical needs are paid for
by Greyhound racing New Zealand
and that the dog's long-term welfare is my only priority.
I also say that the dogs are treated
by specialist veterinary surgeons.
Animal orthopedics have access
to rehabilitation aids like physios and water walkers,
and that the dogs are carefully re-homed
and their medical needs related
to the injury are paid for, for the rest of their lives.
After this conversation, I find
that people appear a bit more at ease.
They become comfortable with the job, the sport,
and they're often really keen
to ask me some questions and discuss it.
Every Greyhound race day is highly regulated,
their systems in place so that any welfare concerns
that I have can be heard and addressed.
Just last week I was on an ad hoc committee ensuring
that the track was safe.
After a We Weather event, I often see new
and updated policies and rule changes.
I have a chance to add to them all in an effort
to keep improving welfare.
I also have the oversight to stand down docks.
This means preventing them from racing for a number of days,
which is of my choosing.
I do this if I find an injury,
but I also do it if I notice any clinical finding
that's indicating a potential injury.
So I can do it just precautionary.
It is difficult to compare this level of oversight
to working at a horse race meeting at the horses.
The interaction with the stewards is limited.
There's less involvement in policies concerning welfares.
At my level, the checks on horses are nearly always
post-race and only if requested.
There is nothing comparable
to the Greyhound Racing New Zealand program
for injuries and rehabilitation.
And at the horses economics is a major factor in deciding
the future of an injured racehorse.
It's also really difficult to compare the results,
the veterinary exams post race between horses and dogs.
If I was in clinical practice
and I wanted to examine a horse for an
or a lameness, I'd always go there
before it worked, even if it was only jogging
and if it had already jogged,
I'd come back in the afternoon at least four hours
later, if not longer.
The horses are prey animals. They're being enticed to run.
They have a high adrenaline
and they're innately wanting to disguise an
injury for horses.
We compare serial heart rates over time to indicate issues.
It's very non-specific.
Serious injuries are able to be found post-race,
but it's common for injuries
to be not found until the next day.
Greyhounds and predators that are born to chase,
there's even rules preventing them from racing if they show
any deviation from chasing the lure
for the duration of the race.
The dogs are smaller, they're well-defined.
It makes palpation really easy to find injuries.
Most injuries are able to be found
as we have a compulsory call down period
of at least 15 minutes
after they race, before they're examined.
It's hard to understand how it was decided
that there's too many injuries and greyhound racing.
Comparing the stats
to the other horse codes is like
comparing apples and oranges.
If the decision was made just comparing fatalities,
then the rate in greyhound racing is about half
that of thoroughbred racing.
As far, as far as last year,
what I wanna know is who decided
that New Zealand Greyhound racing
injury rate is the problem.
But the Australian injury rate,
which is a little higher, is okay.
This seems to be the case
as the government has included in the bill
to bring in thousands of races from Australia.
I do strongly oppose the bill in its current form.
It specifically allows for dog racing for recreation
and betting if it's in, if it's Australian.
And it just seems solely aimed at taking the livelihood
of the current participants.
If the bill proceeded,
I would recommend extending the shutdown date.
This is in line with the recommendation from New Zealand
Veterinary Association physician statement from 2024.
This statement recommended a slow in measured shutdown
preventing swamping of rehoming with large numbers
of dogs all at once.
This new date, a new, sorry,
a new date would also be more in line with Tasmania's plans
betting turnover from Australian gr Greyhound racing over
this extended time can be accumulated
to make a long-term plan of how
to manage all re-homed greyhounds for their lifetime.
That would then match the level of care
and diligence that's currently offered as part
of the Greyhound racing New Zealand's re-homing system
that I've seen every day,
every race I see the handlers, they pat their dogs,
they give them cuddles and kisses on the head.
They even the gruff trainers rub their ears
and give them a little pat under the chin.
New Zealand on a whole agrees
that animals are okay in industry.
We have heaps of different species being farmed.
We have commercial fishery.
New Zealand also agrees of using animals for entertainment.
We have horse racing, we have dog breeding everywhere.
Shows have pony rides
and Jack Russell racing hunting is gaining in popularity.
I think that if the public was informed of the level
of regulation, the veterinary involvement
and the investment that I see see in welfare at the,
at a Greyhound race meeting.
And then they were asked if the participants deserve
to lose their careers, their incomes in their future.
I think they would answer. No, I'm more than happy
to answer any questions that you have to the best
of my abilities with the time that I have left.
Thank you very much, Emma. That's a great submission.
Thank you. And we have a question from Miles Anderson
and Steve Abel.
Yeah, I've got two questions here.
Uh, Emma, first, have you witnessed improved
standards in the industry in your time in the industry?
Yeah, that's a great question.
I started in 2022, which is
after the, all the new plans were put in place,
like the return to the rehabbing program
and rehoming and things.
Um, so I didn't see the before, if that makes any sense.
But what I have seen is a really big acceptance
of the participants to really get involved.
I don't have any pushback, well,
I have very little pushback at a race meeting
when it concerns welfare.
And I really find probably
where it's really improved is track maintenance
is becoming exceptional.
Um, and I think we're really starting to see that,
especially over the last year.
And just going on from that, uh, yeah, if you can share,
um, your opinion on straight versus curved tracks.
Uh, I do not have a wealth of knowledge
'cause I never worked in Australia either.
Um, and the Wnu track did take
a long time to get up and going.
My understanding is that the dogs
that race on straight tracks it when it first starts up
is quite often the dogs that aren't doing
as well on circle tracks.
And then as the straight tracks develop, we can get more
and more dogs across, but the same dogs don't race on circle
tracks as straight tracks.
So it takes a large amount of time developing the number
of dogs to race regularly.
And I think probably there's some breeding involved
that's required to get, really get that up off the ground.
But I do think that that's a good future for grape
for the greyhounds if they continue.
Thank you. Um, I've probably got a quick sup on
that in, in respect to the straight tracks.
You talked about it taking, oh, sorry,
I've got a quick supplementary question
about the straight track tracks.
You talked about it taking a long period of time.
Um, I imagine that probably had something to do
with the consenting and the RMA,
but we're trying to fix that, that, um, the other thing is
have you, have you heard any other reasons why there might
have been a slowdown in adopting of the straight tracks?
I think that Any part of the,
Sorry. The, I think the
biggest thing since I've been here in 2022
is I've been under ministerial review,
or sorry, we have, well,
whatever Greyhound racing has under ministerial review
from the very start.
And so when I started,
the decision was coming in nine months
and then it was coming next year,
and then it was coming the year after.
And there's been a really big doubt about
where the money's be spent.
You know, half of the participants were pushing
for the straight track and ash burden
to be put in straight away.
Others were really cautious about do we put all our money
there if they shut us down, what,
who we don't even know if someone's gonna look
after our participants, that kind of thing.
So as far as I know that there was one ready to turn,
turn dirt and Ashburn ready to go if we got,
if the ministerial review said proceed with caution.
Um, and from there with the number of dogs that we have,
I think that it would probably have been able
to have regular racing and then we'd have the stats to see
that's where we really need to go.
Okay. I thank you very much Emma, Steve.
Yeah, thank you Emma. Um, how much time have we got chair?
Um, we're actually running okay at the moment. Okay.
So far away.
Yeah, I've got a couple of that's okay.
The, the first one is that, um,
what you've articulated about the straight tracks
makes us sort of speculate
that if there was a ban on every other form of track,
but straight tracks, that would still be quite a
significant, uh,
challenge in saying transition for the industry.
Um, I think the challenge
of the transition would be more about
would it affect turnover?
Um, you know, how many races could they put on a week?
I don't think that the challenge would be
that they can't do it.
I just think that there'll be a time of
a decreased income would be my expectation.
Like I said, there's probably some breeding aspects to that
before it really picked back up.
And I'm, I know that punters take a long time time to,
to adjust to new things.
Okay. And then my second one is, um,
what do you think is the reason for the apparent, um,
double standard in terms of how thoroughbreds
and horse racing's been treated compared to Greyhounds?
Like in, in my honest opinion,
and to be fair, I haven't, I didn't have a large exposure
to greyhounds before I started,
but from what I know in the past,
and I'm talking eighties, nineties, early two thousands,
the Greyhound trainers were treating the dogs as a number.
Um, and then I think over that time they lost a little bit
of their autonomy to control the, you know,
to manage their own rest days.
And that become increased in our IB oversight,
more veterinary oversight, et cetera.
And I think that the thoroughbreds
and harness at the moment, they just aren't in
that position perception wise.
And so the trainers still have a lot of autonomy over,
over the race days.
They aren't collecting stats like the Greyhound racing.
They aren't having to put them up in front
of everyone all the time.
And I'm not sure if things were apples
and apples, whether it would look the same.
Okay. That's useful. Thank you.
Okay. And we have Thanks Steve.
We've got a question from Mike Butrick,
Uh, thank you chair. Thank you,
Emma. Just a question around the, um,
pre precautionary stand downs, if you like.
Yes. Um, and just interested in
how they're captured or recorded.
What I'm, what I'm, um, understanding is that, you know, a,
a minor bump or something like that, no visible injury no.
Um, that you can see is still, you know,
precautionary stand down y that is recorded as an injury.
Are you able to just elaborate on what
Please? Yeah, the best example
I can probably give you is that any
hok pa like anytime I palpate a flinch over a right hawk,
which is one of our major concerns about injuries, is
that dog will get stand down for at least 10 days.
Se or sorry, seven to 10 days.
Um, that comes through as a stat.
So I think most of these precautionary stats are in the
seven to 10 day mark.
Uh, but there's no direct evidence that
that dog would then go out and fracture that hok.
All it's saying is that there's some level of bony change
that's detectable on that day and the risk is, is too high.
And so it gets to down the remodeling eases.
And then what I've found is I'm not seeing those dogs get
that, that 10 days popping up
as injuries anytime soon after.
Yeah, that's great. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Emma. Cool. Thank you so much.
No problem. Bye
Bye.
Okay. We have the Nui Greyhound Racing Club in person.
John,
Good afternoon everyone.
Good afternoon. Um,
I haven't prepared anything, uh, unusual.
That's not unusual for me.
Um, most people will tell you I've got a lot to say,
which probably have got too much to say,
but, uh, I've been in the industry for over 45 years.
I've raced greyhounds, spread greyhounds,
and I know a lot more about greyhounds
than probably I should know.
But the, your bill is proposing
to close Greyhound racing down
and I'm deeply opposed to it deeply.
I think that you've taken into consideration, shall I say,
the left looney who want to close down anything
and everything and we'll all be walking around
in grass skirts and eating mungbeans
because these people want a society that exists like that.
And life is not like that. Please get over it.
People. What you never
Heard, Winston Peters called a left loony before.
Yeah, well you have now my friend. You have now.
You have now. And that's fine, that's fine.
He's entitled to his opinion.
But his opinion has been bashed and bashed
and bashed into people's, people's mind.
It's gone everywhere.
It's on the, and there do know that a lot of these overseas,
overseas groups give money to these people who want
to protest against everything
and they wanna protest against everything.
Now that's not that about that and Greyhound racing.
I have an old dog, right. I'll give you a story.
I have an old dog, he's six and a half years old.
Graham racing New Zealand.
Tell me I shouldn't race her, but she loves it.
I mean, she's, every time a trailer goes on the car,
she's out there and she goes out the
other day and she wins a race.
I'm six and a half years old and I love it.
This is what I do, dad. I love it.
You come to my property, you'll find I've got a lot
of old dogs because I don't put dogs
into adoption very often.
I've got a lot of old dogs, which I look after.
And how I maintain and how I do it is simply
because I race younger dogs
and they bring in the revenue, which I pay
for those older dogs.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Now what am I gonna do with those old dogs?
I got a couple of old fellas here, they're nine years old.
They're unad adoptable,
but I'm still gonna have to keep them.
Although I do notice that you've taken out the euthanasia
thing that the minister conveniently walked into parliament
and said that when he got the bill, first, first hearing,
that if we didn't, if we didn't pass this tonight,
all the greyhounds in New Zealand we'd be put down,
which is an utter unappropriated lie.
And he basically lied to the house.
But the point is, this is a fact, he couldn't have done that
because it's quite simple.
It's, we, our rules are, are 10%.
I'm telling you, I I was chairman
of the board on two separate occasions.
I've had a long history, you know, if it wasn't
for Rob Muldoon
and um, uh, ship height,
we wouldn't have gray on racing today.
But they at least had enough sense
and enough go ahead to give us an opportunity.
You know, the land of Gentry,
who I call the horse racing people, it, they,
the land gently of this country kept greyhound racing down
for years and years and years.
They made it, they made it their business.
They made it their, their main aim in life if those
greyhounds ever get going.
'cause it's the working class man's hobby.
It's what he can do. And we put it down.
Now, little bit of interest here.
I noticed the sails the other day.
There was so many horses went through the thing.
Does anybody ever do a checkup to see how many
of those horses get to the races?
I doubt it. I doubt it because I know
and horses race a lot longer than greyhounds, they'll race
until they're 10, 11 years old.
So you basically, you pool the horses,
your younger horses not coming through.
But nobody says anything about that
because nobody wants to say anything about that.
You know, I'm sorry people,
but you, what you what you're being asked
to do is not only wrong, it's morally wrong
because what we've done over the last few years to,
to improve Greyhound racing and make it better.
And we have, I mean we are better than Australia
in most respects.
I mean, well we know the club, which I represent.
We have about a hundred odd members.
We, we meet, we have a meeting most Friday nights
and we have anything up to 200 people in the, in the lounge.
And we have a good night out.
And we, were a small town
and we put a lot of money into a lot of people's pockets.
And without that money going into their pocket,
we are gonna have to lay off staff.
We've got, you know, I think we've got about 10 Ts.
So how they have to all go now.
Those people are all deriving their income from this
and you're closing it down on a whim.
I'm, I'm sorry, but that's how I see it. Anyway.
That's my opinion. I haven't really got
a hell of a lot else to add.
I'll answer your questions, but,
Um, now Miles, Anderson and Steve have got their hand up,
but I had mine up first, so I'll just quickly go that, um,
you me, go for it.
Thank you very much for your most enlightening, um, yeah,
well submission.
That's very, it's great.
You, you mentioned about the Nui track
and I'm just wondering the contribution that you make,
because I know there are other activities that happen on
that track and that happens around the countryside.
Yeah. So how those facilities are gonna be left in your
mind, how those facilities are gonna be left without the
income from that Greyhound racing.
Well, that's one of the problems
that committee has at the moment.
We are basically looking at the options of
what we can can't do with it.
And as the minister wants to take away all our income
and take away all our, all our we, which we built up,
you know, the club was built by people pushing pigs
and barrels around pubs.
That's how we built it.
You know, this wasn't, this wasn't built by,
this wasn't built by by luck or anything else.
This was built by people and people's lives.
If it wasn't for the East town rail railway workshops
and the bloody plant zone over there,
we never got a track going.
Those guys contributed usually to it.
And we just forget about those sort of things.
We forget about the human factor in this
and the, the impact.
I look at all the young guys, like I'm old, right?
I'm, I'm not getting well over it,
but I haven't, I've got, still got a property that's set up
for Greyhounds and it's set up for Greyhounds
and that's basically what it is.
Now when I come to sell that I gotta take it all apart
and, you know, there's no compensation or nothing.
So basically I'm behind the eight rule.
I've got a million dollar property
that's probably gonna cost me buddy 200,000 to bring it back
to a state where I can, I can sell it.
You know, this is, this is what is not being talked about.
And you know, the dogs, the dogs just love racing.
That's the one thing. They're not, they're not a horse.
You don't have to climb up the back
and beat the s**t out of them.
They do it, they do it naturally.
'cause they want to, they do it
naturally 'cause they want to. They want
To. Yeah. Alright, thank you
very much.
Okay, I'll take a question from Miles and then Steve able
Yep. Thanks
Chair.
Um, could you please tell us what interactions you've had
with the ministerial advisory group?
Um, since they've been set up?
Yeah. Uh, the mystery people, um, people you can't find.
Uh, I got a email from them requesting whether I would be
interested in rehoming some dogs or holding them.
Uh, I sent back
and replied that I would, unfortunately, I, you know,
I said I would, uh,
and I've, I've never heard back from them
and that would be six months ago.
So that's how active they are. Thank you
Steve.
Yeah. Well some, some of us left learnings would like it
to be a just transition, uh, at least.
So we are genuinely listening
to you on um, what it feels like.
Yeah. Um, the thing I wanted to ask you is that, um,
and understanding glad
and clear, you guys don't want this to shut down, uh,
but if it is gonna happen, how can it be done in a way that,
um, is fair and reasonable as much as it can be
and minimizes the, the harm to people and animals?
Um, but I wonder if you think there's some merit in
extending the, the timeframe
and there's also people suggesting
that keeping straight tracks going
for the timeframe might be beneficial.
Do you have any opinion on that?
Yeah, I fully support the straight tracks.
I race on it regularly. Uh, it's good for my old dogs.
I love it. Um, but of course,
and I did hear somebody say something about why it wasn't
more straight tracks.
It took a long time to establish the rate track
and get it right and that's what they did.
They sat down and got it right and I'll tell you what it is.
Right. And it works really well and it's a,
and it's a tribute to growing out,
racing New Zealand that they managed it.
They got a lot of criticism over, but they got it right
and they got it right first time.
And that's unusual.
Alright, Thank you.
You've heard from me. Okay,
Fantastic. Thank
you very much, John. That was excellent.
Okay, so now we've got, uh, Sarah Clark. Roy.
Yes.
Hi there. Hi. Thank you for inviting me to speak.
Um, my name is Sarah Clark, um, and I oppose this bill.
Um, I'm an independent veterinarian, um, who's working
with first opinion companion animal practice.
I also have a background in mixed animal practice,
animal science research
and pharmaceutical product development.
The views I express are my professional opinion
as an independent vet
with 20 years experience in the animal health sector,
I have 13 years experience as a clinical vet
and the balance working in animal health research.
My background has given me a thorough understanding
of animal husbandry
and welfare from research animals involved in experiments
that required ethics approval to working dogs on farms
to pet dogs, and both high
and low socioeconomic areas to dogs
that help catch wild pigs for sport.
Until recently, my exposure to greyhounds was limited
to that of Pet Hounds.
As a new graduate vet, I even acquired two
of my own two greyhounds.
Um, after watching a young working dog puppy die,
when we were unable to get a blood transfusion into him fast
enough, he had eaten rat bait.
I made sure I'd never be put in that situation again
by having my personal donors on hand.
My experience with raising greyhounds has been exclusively
over the last three years since the Robinson Review
and includes visiting the majority of the kennels north
of TPO and attending as track fit on race day.
This has just been in, uh, Cambridge and Auckland.
From this experience, I can verify
that the improvements listed in the Robinson Review
have all been implemented.
Greyhound racing New Zealand continues to review
and revise, um, rules actively to improve dog welfare
and reduce injury risk.
The greatest concern I have with this bill is
that it is apparently based on poor welfare conditions
of racing greyhounds,
but I can say from firsthand experience,
this is simply not supported by the evidence.
I'm also concerned by the apparent lack
of democratic process in the absence of consultation
with industry partners.
I'm sure you've heard from them, um,
these actions have resulted in members
of our community being alienated
and ostracized disappointingly.
I've felt it myself, even from other veterinarians
who have never been to a Greyhound race track
or stepped inside a racing kennel
because even the educated public believe
that the government shouldn't,
wouldn't shut down an entire industry based on welfare
grounds if it wasn't true.
I can verify that the Greyhound racing New Zealand have
addressed their welfare concerns, traceability,
injury management, and life after racing
before I become involved at the end of 2022.
If I was to criticize Greyhound racing,
it would be the late charge on a publicity complaint
to improve their public image.
In my opinion,
it could have started much earlier, but they did.
What a lot of Kiwis would do is keep their head down focused
on what was important being the dogs and did the mahi.
While I'm personally insulated from the economic
consequences of this bill, I have planned
to undertake further training in sports medicine
that would benefit not only racing greyhounds,
but also working dogs agility and sport dogs,
or any occupation that requires athletic performance.
Excuse me. This professional investment would not be viable
without greyhound racing as it requires enough owners
that are willing to support advanced veteran care
if the industry were to be be closed down,
which I disagree with.
It should be conducted in a controlled manner that allows
the dogs to be absorbed into the
population in this industry.
The difference between a champion race dog
and one that's not competitive as a quarter of a second,
these animals are incredible athletes
and their trainers treat them as such.
The trainers understand that an animal has to be happy
and healthy to perform at its best and they love their dogs
and the welfare standards.
Greyhounds and enjoy. It's enviable.
How are we going for time? Yep.
No, you're good to go with.
Okay. Um, if you've got any questions,
I could take questions or I've got some more
that I could just give you some firsthand experience around,
um, being a, being a bit what, like what we see? Yeah,
If you wanna take two or three minutes doing that. Okay.
That would be great. I'll start, actually,
I'll just interrupt you for a sec 'cause I see my
colleague Tanya's got a question.
Oh, thank you Madam Chair.
Um, thank you Sierra for the
submission and, and speaking to it.
Um, you've just touched on the sort of suggestion there
that if this is to proceed then you'd like
to see it in a controlled way.
Your written submission talks about, um, a postponement
to deal with the rehoming, which you see as as unmanageable.
And we are hearing that. What would you see
as a realistic timeframe to be able to deliver
that if that was the case?
Um, I would, uh, agree with the report
that Emma referred to.
Um, and, and I would say that's the four to five years.
Um, of course I suppose that timeline has started
because we've stopped breeding, um, at the
after the announcement.
But, um, yeah, it, it needs
to be done in a slower manner than we
what's currently proposed.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks
Amy. Okay, Sarah.
Okay. Um, just some other things I'd like to point out is
that, um, your view in what constitutes animal welfare, um,
changes over time when you're working on the
coalface of animal health?
Working dogs frequently injure cruciate ligaments requiring
surgery, um, from climbing through fences, um,
jumping on and off quad bikes.
Um, pet dogs can get hurt.
They can break acru, uh, cruciate
or slip a disc by getting off the couch
or sometimes they get shaken and hurt at a dog park.
Um, or even walking down the street, I've even seen a dog
with its hind leg removed by a passing train
because its owner chose
to walk it off leash along the train track
and then the pig dogs that would almost come in late at
night and the calls would leave me on edge
as I arrived at a rural vet clinic like at dark while it was
dark, I'd be relieved
for my own safety when I saw
that there was a hurt dog waiting.
And the nature and the severity of the severity
of these injuries was always much worse than
what we witnessed on the racetrack.
Um, any vet who works in first opinion medicine
um, can verify that we see a significant number
of grade three and grade four dental disease every day.
Often there's pushback from clients when we recommend
treatment, yet anyone
who has ever had a root canal can imagine the discomfort
that these animals are living with every day.
I find myself wishing I could hold the general public
to the same welfare standards
that Greyhound racing New Zealand set.
But welfare is more than injuries and health conditions.
Some of the clinics I work at have 50%
or greater of their patients require anxiety medication
for the dogs to, for the vet to be able to examine the dog
or even vaccinate it safely.
These are pet dogs.
They've got busy, hardworking owners
and it's a variety of reasons that cause this often due
to some degree of socialization or lack thereof.
But in any case, the dogs end up difficult to handle
and a lot of these issues just don't happen with greyhounds
because of the regulations that are currently in place.
Thank you very much. Does anyone have any other questions?
Brilliant. Thanks Sarah.
Good submission. So we're on now.
Okay. So we have safe
for 10 minutes via Zoom.
So this is Emma Brody
Koto. Can
everyone see me okay?
Yes. Great. And we can hear you too, Emma. Thank you.
Welcome to the primary production select committee.
You've got 10 minutes
and it would be great if you could allow some time
for some questions at the end.
'cause I'm sure there will be and you can take it
that your submission has been read.
Got it. Thanks very much. Thank you. Just wait,
There's two people leaving so it's a little bit noisy.
So I'll just, I'll just wait for a few
seconds and then you can make a start.
Okay. Far away. Thanks Emma. No
Worries. Thank you for the
opportunity to speak to you today.
My name is Emma Brody.
I'm a campaign manager with Safe For many years,
safe has called for an end
to commercial greyhound racing in Aldo.
So it goes without saying that we strongly support this bill
and urge the committee to recommend its passage in full.
This bill is an evidence-based, proportionate
and compassionate response
to a longstanding pattern of harm.
As set out in our written submission,
racing puts dogs at a foreseeable risk of serious injury
and premature death.
And that risk cannot be eliminated through reform
on any given day at a race,
dogs can suffer from broken bones, dislocations,
muscle tears, spinal injuries, and internal trauma.
Some are killed on the spot
and others leave the track with injuries
that shape the rest of their lives.
Our written submission focuses on this animal welfare
evidence, some of the data and the formal review processes.
But what it cannot capture is what those harms look like
for individual dogs.
Because behind every statistic is a living,
breathing animal whose life has been altered
or ended in the pursuit of profit.
And I'd like to briefly share a few examples
from the past year.
On March 13th, 2025,
Homebush honey collapsed after a trial.
Safe was actually sent video footage of her final moments.
Her breathing was labored, she struggled to stand.
We watched her fall to the ground
and her lifeless body carried away.
Veterinary assessment later determined
that she had suffered sudden cardiovascular collapse.
She was just five years old exactly three months later,
on the 13th of June, 2025, Homebush Fi Joa collapsed
and died at the law.
After a race, she had severe internal bleeding in her chest
and lungs and significant fluid buildup in her lungs.
Her body could no longer circulate oxygen properly,
and her heart and lungs failed.
She was just two and a half years old.
And then on the 28th of December, 2025,
while we were out enjoying the summer holidays,
epic pill broke both bones in her lower right four leg.
During a race, the fracture was open,
meaning the bone had pierced through the skin.
The injury was so severe
that vets concluded there was no
realistic prospect for recovery.
She was euthanized also at just two and a half years old.
These dogs were young, they were doing exactly
what they were bred and trained to do.
Their injuries were not freak accidents or outliers.
They are part of a pattern that has persisted year
after year, despite new rules, new audits,
new welfare initiatives.
That is the uncomfortable truth.
At the heart of this bill, I did want to address some
of the arguments the industry often raises
and has raised today in response to cases like these.
Um, we are frequently told
that advocacy groups look at injuries
and deaths out of context.
That we should instead focus on injury
rates per number of starts.
But for the dogs involved,
that context does not make broken bones
or sudden heart failure any less real.
Even a low percentage still translates into hundreds
of individual animals harmed each year.
And it's a model that fails to account for cumulative risk.
We are also told that the industry has made improvements
and safe acknowledges that some changes have been made such
as better euthanasia controls.
But the question before this committee today is not whether
there have been reforms on paper,
but whether dogs are being protected in practice.
And the evidence shows they are not.
Multiple reviews, as you know, over more than a decade,
examined this industry in depth.
Each found recurring welfare failures,
each prompted new rules and oversight mechanisms,
and dogs continue
to suffer catastrophic injuries and sudden deaths.
What those reviews, alter reviews ultimately show is
that this is not a problem of one bad track
or one rogue trainer or one unlucky race.
It's a problem of the activity itself.
Commercial greyhound racing requires dogs
to sprint at extreme speeds in close quarters under
competitive pressure for the purposes of gambling
where they are regarded as financial assets.
That combination carries unavoidable risks
that regulation has not and cannot remove.
We are also told that people in the industry care deeply
about their dogs and
that their livelihoods depend on racing.
And safe does not dispute that many individuals form bonds
with these animals and care about these dogs
and that families rely on this industry for income.
But caring about these dogs is not the same as being able
to protect them from harm within a commercial racing system.
When the evidence shows that the harm remains endemic
and economic reliance cannot justify continuing an activity
that foreseeably injures animals
and falls short of the standards parliament has set within
our animal welfare laws.
This bill is not a judgment on individual character.
It is a judgment about whether a particular industry model
can meet modern animal welfare standards
and the evidence shows that it cannot.
Um, before I close, I wanna quickly note
that this bill reflects strong and sustained public concern.
Independent polling over several years
has consistently shown majority support
for ending greyhound racing.
And this is one of the very rare animal issues
to attract agreement across political lines.
New Zealanders increasingly expect parliament
to act decisively when animals are being harmed
in predictable ways.
And internationally. New Zealand is not acting in isolation.
Greyhound racing is in sharp decline globally.
We are one of only five countries
to still have a commercial dog racing industry.
And this bull places al Tiera firmly
within that global shift.
And to finish up today, I just wanna turn
to safes recommendations
and our submission, um, alongside recommending
that this bill be passed, we also asked the committee
to consider two additional safeguards to ensure
that the, Hey, excuse
Me, Emma, can I just interrupt you?
'cause you you do outline those quite succinctly in your,
um, submission and everybody read your submission
and I'm just conscious of the fact
that we've got four people with their hands up,
so I don't want 'em to miss out. So no
Worries. Can I make one
point on one of the recommendations? Sure,
Go for It. Thank you. Just
on the first one about prohibiting the
export of Greyhounds overseas,
there was just a case I wanted to share with you today.
Um, 'cause as you might know, in April last year,
a trainer exported 80 greyhounds
to continue racing in Australia.
And then on the 26th of November, 2025, one of those dogs,
gold star coder collapsed and died at a Queensland track
after what was described as an acute cardiac incident.
And so that outcome makes the point plain plainly
that closure at home doesn't necessarily mean meaningful
protection for these dogs.
So we believe that's important to ensure
that this is a comprehensive and compassionate closure.
Okay, I'm gonna thank you very much, Emma.
I'm gonna start with Mike Butrick and then we will go.
Steve Abel, miles and Cam.
Uh, thank you chair. Uh,
thank you Emma for your submission.
Just a question for you around engagement.
Um, have you ever met with Greyhound racing in New Zealand
or visited the Greyhound kennel's license kennel
to actually verify your claims?
I mean, we've had correspondence
with Greyhound Racing New Zealand.
There's been, sometimes there's issues when a dog dies
and we request more information about the
circumstances around the death.
We've had a really difficult time with transparency
and getting information back. Um, so
You have so sorry.
Um, the question, have you actually met with them
or visited, um, licensed kennels?
We have not, but I, we believe
that the evidence across the reviews over many,
many years speaks for itself.
All the injury data, the can,
the inconsistencies across kennel
inspections, it speaks for itself.
Can I just have a sip on that, sorry, chair. Sure.
Um, thank you Emma.
Have you, have you had an invitation from gr gr
nz to come and visit?
Um, not to my knowledge, no. Okay. Thank you.
I know that to them we're one of the, the left loonie. Thank
You.
Um, I can't remember
what I switched what I said now, Steve,
Thank you. Well,
this left learning is met with GRNZ twice, so if
it's any help, um, the question I've got for you is, Emma,
taking into account the, um, principle of just transition
and what seems to be heartfelt, genuine, uh, you know,
concerns for the welfare
of the people involved in the industry.
Do you think it's legitimate for us as a committee
to consider a longer transition time if
that would meaningfully, uh, assist in that challenge?
You know, obviously the purpose is to protect the welfare
of the animals, but also we are
responsible for the welfare of people.
Yeah, absolutely. Um,
safe would not support a longer transition time.
Okay. Um, every day that racing remains legal
and operating is a day that dogs are at risk
of serious injury and death.
So the sooner that we wind up greyhound racing, the sooner
that those dogs are protected.
Although, having said that, safe absolutely supports
measures for a just transition for the people involved.
And we, it's sympathetic that there's, um, there's a lot
of emotions wrapped up in this
and it's a really, it's a really, um,
big transit transition for these people.
So we support, we would,
we think the government should
support them in any way that you can. Thank
You.
Miles.
Yeah. Hi. Um, Emma, could you, um,
clarify safe's position around any working animals
or particularly working dogs?
Um, I, we haven't done any work with working dogs,
but I mean, safe stands for safe Animals from Exploitation.
So we are opposed to any industries
or practices that are exploitative or harmful to animals.
Well, could you, um, clarify
what you mean by exploitation?
Um, sorry.
How, how is this relevant to the,
the question at hand about greyhound racing?
It's, it's relevant to your position.
Um, would you like me
to clarify our position on greyhound racing?
I'd like you to clarify whether you, your organization,
um, what your organization's position is on, um,
in particular working dogs, but working animals full stop.
Well, we believe that animals need to be treated as
the sentient individuals that they are
and not as commodities, not as financial assets.
And so we support the treatment of animals
that respect them as such.
And, uh, would, excuse me. Sorry, chair.
That's okay. If you could, um, clarify what that means,
does that mean you are opposed to all forms of, um,
owning and, and using animals for any form
of, um, assistance or, and
or, um, in the case of gambling? Gambling?
Well, um, okay, interesting question.
I mean, we are opposed to the use
of animals in entertainment and gambling industries.
Um, that's a very black and white position.
But in terms of, you know, assistance dogs
or dogs as companions in,
in people's homes, not opposed to that at all.
So long as they're treated well and respected,
Um, I think we better leave it there.
Miles is a sentian animal myself.
I'm wondering why I'm working,
but, um, that, that we'll move on to Cameron Luxton. Oh,
I dunno if I'm gonna help you there, chair.
It's not exactly moving on.
I'm kind of asking the question from the other direction.
Like, um, you've talked about like economic gain, uh,
Emma, um mm-hmm.
Being an issue, um, cannot be regulated to safety.
There is another comment you made in your submission.
I just, I wonder, yes.
It made me wonder like, was there any type of animal, um,
uh, racing that you'd be comfortable
seeing happen for profit? Any animal
For racing? Absolutely
not. I mean,
'cause it, it, the industry is designed around
that the animals are financial assets for these people.
It is about how much money they can earn in this industry.
Um, and that is inherently exploitative.
It is inherently dangerous.
And so no, we, yeah, we don't support using animals
for racing or entertainment.
Thank you for clarifying. Appreciate it.
No worries. Um,
are there any further questions?
Are there, is there time for another?
Pardon? Is there time for another,
Uh, one minute.
Uh, just a very quick one, Emma.
Obviously you deal with a lot of added welfare issues
and you know, across the span of those issues,
the things we see with happening with pigs and cages or cows
and mud and so forth.
Um, how does this rate on that sort of scale
of really egregious harm being done to animals?
Animals, um, in terms of the whole span
of animal use in the country,
and is it a little bit like greyhounds have been thrown
under the bus when, you know, move
to ban horse racing, for example?
Right. I mean, we support stronger protections across
all animal industries.
Um, we know horse racing is rife with issues.
Animal agriculture is rife with issues.
Um, we don't sort of assess what we might campaign
for based on, based on that kind of metric around how small
or big an industry might be.
Um, but what we, we do know with greyhound racing is
that there is such a consistent, longstanding evidence
of harm that they, it was a pretty open and shut case.
Brilliant. Thank you.
Um, sorry, we've got one supplementary from Mike
Butrick and then we are done.
Thank you very much, Emma. Uh,
Thank you Chair E Emma, you just mentioned evidence a lot
and I, um, just to, during the early part of your, um,
submissions, you said almost
that the statistics don't matter.
So is it about the evidence
and is it about the improvement in behavior
or does do the statistics and improvement not matter?
Like have you read the, um,
the racing industry boards reports
and recent reports and stuff like that? Yes,
Yes. No, it, it all
matters.
I was simply trying to make the point
that they're not merely statistics,
that there are individual sentient
animals behind those numbers.
And I wanted to honor some of those lives today.
Um, but it all, it all matters in terms of contributing
to the, the passion of harm that
that's very evident in this industry.
So would I think we better wrap up there?
Thank you very much, Mike. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Okay. We have a 10 minute break.
We will be back on fire at 3:10 PM All good.
Everyone, we might as well get this, get going.
I think we have Anne drops in online. We've got
Here.
Just wait till it quiets down a little bit.
Anne, we'll be with you in a sec.
Okay, Anne, we have you for five minutes, so, um,
if you could allow a little bit of time for a couple
of questions at the end, that would be great, but far away.
If door's yours,
Thank you very much for inviting me to talk to you.
I'm APO opposing the Greyhound Racing Ban.
I've been involved in Greyhound since 1979,
so I'm an older person.
Um, I've been an owner, a trainer, trainer.
I've also, um, spent years being the track curator at
Christchurch Greyhound Club.
Um, I've deeply passionate about these animals.
I've spent years and years working with them. Always.
Welfare has always been the big thing is we always want
to take our dogs to the track healthy
and bring them home healthy.
Our lives revolve around them.
Everything done in our, on our property
was done around the dogs.
So I strongly oppose, sorry, the cat's here.
Sorry. I strongly oppose being for various reasons.
As I say, I've been a track curator.
I have seen the improvements in track standards from when I,
I have from when I left being a curator to now
I've seen the welfare standards improve so much.
Um, my biggest concern is the welfare of the dogs
and also the welfare of the people.
I've known people that
before they're even born, that now are young trainers
who have spent their whole life working
around their parents with their dogs.
They don't go to video rooms
or down the street, street racing.
They go out and work at the kennels with mum and dad.
They love their dogs. They're passionate people.
Um, and this band is gonna absolutely
ripped their whole families apart.
We've been subject from different groups as being called.
You know, these mean people. You know, we've got no heart.
I can tell you everybody that works with their greyhounds,
the greyhounds are the most important part of their life.
It's a lifestyle. It's not a financial gain.
None of us have big fancy cars, flash properties.
We work 24 7
to give our dogs best conditions.
Our life revolves around them.
I could tell you a story that my, my mother died.
My sister went home and walked a litter of pups.
One of them was very successful,
but unfortunately she had a racing suit
next day on the TV was plastered everywhere about
how this dog was euthanized.
That dog had an owner, a trainer, people that had spent
all its life looking after it
and were absolutely devastated.
Do you know what it's like to see that plastered over the TV
saying how cruel we are?
We are the ones that are heartbroken.
If a dog does get injured, we spend a lot
of time keeping them injury free.
We give them the, we are their physio, we are their midwife,
everything like that.
We look after them, we bathe them.
Our dogs get bath after every race.
They get physio, they go on blankets.
We give them the utmost care.
Then we work onto them to get them re-homed.
We go and help the rear homing agencies.
We have track days where we're tired.
Greyhounds come back to the track.
We go along, cut their nails
for their owners, their new owners.
The dogs get to the track, they open the gate
and the dogs pull their owners out onto the track.
Some of these people were anti racing people thinking they
had rescued this dog,
and all the dog wants to do is drag it out to the track
and go to the boxes, go around, you know,
just as a social day.
These are pet dogs that could have been rehomed
five, six years ago.
That's how much the dogs like, you know,
that's their happy place.
That was their happy place as they used the same
as when we were playing sports as young people.
So that's my dog in the background.
So I oppose it on welfare of the people and the dogs
because we have got a very structured welfare
system in place, but it's the people
as well that I fear for.
Um, any other questions? That's, that's what I have to say.
I'm very passionate about the dogs.
I mow parks and reserves now.
I see retired dogs walking
around rolleston every day with their new owners.
Some of them are racing people, some majority aren't,
but they don't believe this ban was ever should go ahead,
just in general public.
So any questions? I'll answer, but that's,
Thank, thank you. Thank
you so much. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much for your time and,
and, um, we've actually reached time now,
but we do appreciate your sentiments
and they have been shared by others today on the effects on
families and livelihoods and, um, welfare.
So thank you very much,
Much. Thank you for your time.
Okay. We now have Graham Berg on Zoom. Graham,
Hello.
Hi,
You have, you have five minutes.
Thank you. Hang on. I'll just click the,
it says my camera's being used by other apps.
Oh, thank you for this opportunity.
I'm familiar with most of you
because I watch a lot of parliament.
It's a, it's a pretty empty life
and I didn't realize how empty it was.
I looked up and found, I have a Steve Abel CD in the rack.
But anyway, um, it makes you one of only seven
People in the world On Spotify, Steve, that's why.
And watching Parliament. Yeah,
I did 40 years in local authority roading
and, um, 40 years a racers owner.
And I was initially involved in Greyhounds for that period.
John MacArthur was talking about establishing the Nui
track, I suppose.
My wife and I were trainers. She was good.
She did most of the good stuff
and I was most importantly the track manager
of the first grass track at Whanganui Nui.
So I got out it in the nineties.
I did, there was a rehoming thing,
there was nowhere to rehome them.
We sort of kept ours as pets. And then I got a phone call.
Um, they were looking for a project manager
to redo Hatrick Raceway.
I was struggling. So I went back on a three month basis
that I would project manage that
and ended up doing the straight track
and think about the straight track taking a long time.
They effectively looked over the fence
and says, put a straight track there.
And that's where it was. It wasn't the
RMA and things like that.
It was a, a greenfield site where you had to work
around the horses working race days and features like that.
Plus we had to design it from scratch.
Um, but that was a real community thing.
The people I called in, all
of the old guys I knew the engineer put in a lot of time
and free time and stuff.
We built it on the basis it was for the community.
It was good for horse racing, it was good for the community.
People loved going to Greyhounds on a Friday night.
It's a working man's thing, and that's what Nu really is.
It's a, it's a working man's town.
So we built the straight track on that basis.
The straight track racing is the best form of racing.
It's natural to them. They don't need a lot of training.
What we seen see before is not right.
That's how they were chased
with their head down on the lure on the grass.
And while every dog needs a run on it coming from a circular
track, it's the natural way for them to go.
And it's just beautiful, you know, it just works well.
The dogs love it.
Um, it's dogs at six
and a half when in the end it's injury free, really.
So I do think greyhounds race too much
and that there should be restrictions on that.
There shouldn't be the big stables.
I think from, uh, kennels from the
outside it looks very industrial and uncaring too.
So I think that the need to make adjustments like that,
but the straight track racing is the way to go.
But, um, I think politics have played a part in here in this
that I sort of realized when I saw everyone yesterday
saying they're not gonna vote anymore.
I suppose all voted for New Zealand first in the hope that
that would keep it going.
But I think that moment on TV when both leaders said they
would ban Greyhound racing, things were doomed.
And then you were looking for some support in parliament.
Well, in Parliament,
the Greens taught the most about poverty and working class
and that and everything, but they're opposed to it.
So we weren't gonna get any support.
Greyhound was in Parliament.
Um, the idea of transferring assets sort
of incorporated societies to me is unbelievable
and sets us air precedent, you know, so
it straight track racing is beautiful.
It should be able to keep going.
It ticks all the boxes and you appreciate it.
Thank you very much, Graham.
Um, we have a question from Tangi us and then Steve Abel.
Thank you Madam Chair.
Thank you Graham, for, um, your time today.
Look, just one quick question from me,
and that's, you say your view is
that Greyhound's race too often.
Why? What, what's formed that view for you, for you?
Oh, um, you know, any athlete
or as a runner, you know, things like that.
You can't go all year round can you?
And you, you know, it, it's, they just do race too often.
It's no athlete can race that often
and it'd be good for you, you know, so they should, if,
if they, but they have the ability to race
that often in the current setup.
So, you know, that can be legislated. Okay.
That is legislated to a degree,
but I think they could do further
and if they had done that race less often,
the statistics would've dropped too.
Thank you. Um, Steve, quick question.
Yeah. So thank you very much, Graham,
for your compelling submission
and do you think that it's important
that we seriously consider a,
a slight extension on the closure?
At least I realize that there should be no closure in your
view, but, um, that that would be some benefit
to the just transition concerns
of the people involved in the industry.
Y yes, for sure, but I'd also like to add, in the two
and a half years I was over there doing that mixing
with all types from laboratories to Looney lefties.
Um, I didn't find anyone to post
to ground racing in this town.
Couldn't find a person.
So the 75% figure that was in
the post dinner, it comes from.
Mm.
Thank you very much grime for sharing your insights
and your knowledge clearly of the industry.
Thank you. Appreciate it.
No problem. Okay.
We have animal justice party, both Danette and Karen.
You have 10 minutes and as said earlier, previously, um,
if you could leave some time
for questions, that would be fantastic. The floor is yours.
Uh, Ana Coto and thank you for the opportunity to speak.
I'm Dan Wetter, general Secretary
of the Animal Justice Party, Arto New Zealand.
We are a registered political party advocating
for the rights, welfare and protection of animals.
Our vision is a society where animals are treated
with respect and compassion, not as commodities,
but as sentient beings who deserve, who are deserving of,
uh, moral consideration.
So we strongly support the racing industry amendment Bill.
This bill represents a common sense opportunity not
to be cruel to dogs.
Um, and after more than a decade of reviews, inquiries,
and reform attempts, it is clear
that greyhound racing cannot be made safe or humane.
So we'll take our rhythm submission as read.
Um, and I'll just like to highlight a few key areas
for additional consideration.
There are two of us, as you heard speaking today.
I'll start and then Karen Singleton,
a JP policy president will continue shortly after.
So I'm sure you've heard from many in the industry today
who have shared, um, their emotional views.
And we hear those two,
especially when we post about another greyhound's
death on our socials.
Uh, it fills up with anger comments from industry
supporters, and while some
of what's said can be really unpleasant, uh, we try
to approach it with compassion
because we do understand how people's livelihoods
and identities are tied into this practice.
But we do think it's important to pause
and reflect on some of the reoccurring arguments made in
defense of greyhound racing.
So the first one and the most popular one is other dogs
suffer in pounds.
So the stats are worse in pounds.
So racing isn't the worst harm.
We also have heard horses today
and even questions, uh,
from the select committee about other forms of harm.
The fact is, just
because harm exists elsewhere, it doesn't make another form
of cruelty acceptable.
Two wrongs don't make racing right.
We also hear that greyhounds love to race
and that they're built to run.
The fact is dogs absolutely love to run freely, safely
for pleasure, but racing forces them into high speed,
high risk tracks for human profit, not for joy.
So running freely is joy, but racing is exploitation.
Uh, we also hear, uh, we take incredible care of our dogs.
The fact is, even the most caring trainers cannot fix a
system that is built on overbreeding injury and euthanasia.
Good people can do, uh, good things in a bad system,
but that doesn't really make the system acceptable.
If the dogs could opt out, the industry would collapse.
We also hear tradition is not, um, so that dogs race
for sport, it's tradition.
Uh, and the fact is
that tradition is not an ethical defense.
A cruel tradition is still cruel.
And of course, we hear this is our livelihood
and we understand that loss, and we believe workers
and families should receive proper transition support.
But systematic cruelty cannot be justified by livelihoods.
What really stands out, uh, in all of these arguments is
that they are centered on people, not on the dogs.
So all of the arguments are
around people in the industry losing
or economic loss, not the dogs.
And for once this discussion must be about
the greyhounds themselves.
The animals bred, injured and sometimes killed for gambling.
The question isn't if they suffer, but when they do,
and that's why alongside closing the industry,
we have recommended specific safeguards
to keep every greyhound's welfare at the
center of the transition.
Cowra will speak to those
and how this bill fits within New Zealand's
border moral journey. Passover to Karen.
Thank you. So Kiara Karen Singleton, policy president
of the Animal Justice Party.
So as Danta said, this bill is essential
to ending systemic harm,
but how we close the industry, we'll determine what it means
for greyhounds themselves.
Our focus is that every dog is protected, accounted for,
and given the best possible future.
In our written submission, we set out a number
of detailed recommendations.
I'm just gonna touch on two briefly now.
Um, the first being the transition agency board,
which should include genuine animal welfare
and veterinary expertise.
If decisions about rehoming injury management
and closure are made without that knowledge,
there is a real risk that dogs are treated as numbers
to move on rather than as individuals who need care.
And second, successfully. Rehomed must mean exactly that.
We need clear, rigorous criteria, verified adoptions,
home checks, and follower welfare assessment.
The greyhound is not truly re-homed just
because paperwork is done.
They are re-homed when they are safe, settled,
thriving in a permanent home.
So these steps are how we show in practice
that this bill is about the dogs,
not just about shutting down a business model.
Now, independent polling makes the bigger picture very clear
across every major demographic.
The majority of New Zealanders want this industry to end.
It has lost its social license.
Only a small minority see it as acceptable.
While most recognized it is incompatible
with our national values of compassion and fairness.
If we step back, this change fits into a longer story about
who we are as a country and how our morals evolve.
Just as we once accepted smoking in workplaces,
animal acts in circuses
or live exports, it's defended us tradition,
economic necessity or not the worst harm.
We later recognize that we could and should do better.
When the evidence of harm accumulated
and public conscience shifted, parliament acted.
Ending greyhound racing is the next step on
that same moral evolution.
And just as in those past transitions,
people affected should not be left behind.
They deserve a fair and well-planned transition.
Funding retraining and pathways into more sustainable
and ethical industries.
Change can be compassionate for both humans and animals.
What matters most though is that we honor
who we are becoming as a society.
One that rejects cruelty, values, empathy,
and understands that the measure of our progress is
how we treat the most vulnerable beings amongst us.
This bill is not about punishing an industry,
it's about aligning our laws with the values
of the public already hold, listening to evidence, listening
to compassion, and recognizing
that this chapter has reached its natural and now means you.
We're open to questions if you have any.
Um, we've we're just about out of time,
but Miles Anderson had your hand up first,
so if you could do it, make it very quick. Miles.
So could, um, thanks for your, um, submission.
Would you be able to, um, tell me about Rehoming?
Is your organization involved in rehoming these dogs?
At the moment we are not,
but we do support all the efforts
and think some, a credible mahi has been going into that.
So, uh, yeah, big round of applause
for everyone involved in those efforts today.
Thank you. Thank, thank you very much Danette
and Karen, we appreciate your time today.
We'll move on to the next submitters.
Um, we've got Emily Robertson on Zoom.
Emily, you have Hi Emily.
Hi. Um, you have 10 minutes. Oh, five minutes. Sorry.
Perfect. So,
Uh, thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today
in strong support of this bill.
Um, my name is Emily Robertson,
and to give you a bit of background about myself,
I've been involved in Greyhound advocacy for about 12 years,
uh, since I adopted my first Greyhound in 2014.
During the time I've adopted
and foster 10 others, I'm actively involved
with the Greyhound Zealand
and I'm also the trustee of a Greyhound Rehoming charity
that operates outside of the Great Mates program.
So my views on this issue are informed by
my long-term hands-on experience with greyhounds, both
during and after their transition from
racing and into pet life.
During my submissions today, I'd like
to take the opportunity to address directly some
of the key concerns that have been raised
by submitters opposing the bill.
First on the issue of consultation, it has been suggested
that industry participants have not been consulted
until now, and that this undermines somehow the
legitimacy of the decision.
Now before you with respect,
that argument does not withstand scrutiny.
This decision did not come out of nowhere
and it did not occur in a vacuum.
The greyhound racing industry has had multiple sustained
opportunities over many years to engage with government
and regulators about welfare concerns.
There have been successive reviews, including
but not limited to the Hanson report.
In 2017, the subsequent Robertson review, as well
as scrutiny through the petitions committee process,
the same issues, injuries, deaths,
systemic welfare concerns have been identified repeatedly
over more than a decade.
Significantly, several
of the earlier reviews were actually initiated
by the industry itself.
As a result, industry participants had direct input into the
scope of these reviews and
therefore into the benchmarks against which they were later
assessed in the Robertson Review.
In that sense, the industry has arguably enjoyed a greater
level of consultation
and influence over the process
than animal advocates ever have.
Against that background, it is extremely difficult
to sustain the claim that the industry has been denied.
A voice consultation has occurred repeatedly
and often on terms shaped by the industry.
A failure by the industry's participants
to meaningfully engage with
or act on the finding those processes does not invalidate
this one, nor does it oblige parliament to delay action
yet again in the face of clear
and consistent evidence of harm.
Secondly, I would like
to address the concern about broadcasting
and wagering on Australian greyhound racing,
which the bill allows on this point.
I agree. The bill, as it has drafted,
currently contains a defect
allowing the continued broadcasting
and wagering on Australian greyhound racing risks,
undermining the fundamental purpose of this ban.
However, the appropriate response to that defect is not
to abandon or delay the ban, it is to fix the legislation.
This should be addressed
by ensuring the law does not permit the promotional
consumption of greyhound racing content
from other jurisdictions.
If New Zealand is serious about being a world leader in
animal welfare as it once was when the Animal Welfare Act
was introduced, then part of
that leadership should be setting clear expectations
and encouraging other nations to uphold the same standards
that we applied domestically rather than exporting the harm
offshore while claiming progress at home.
Thirdly, I would like
to address the argument about straight tracks,
which has been presented as an alternative to a ban.
The industry was expressly advised to investigate the use
of straight tracks in the Hanson report in 2017.
The industry has now had approximately eight years
to meaningfully implement straight track racing if,
but believed it was a genuine solution.
The Robertson review expressly identified the failure
to implement straight tracks as a concern.
Given the clear recommendation in the earlier Hanson report,
the suggestion that the industry has not had sufficient
opportunity to do so is unfounded.
This was not a new idea raised too late in the piece.
While a Provo, a proverbial acts swung above their heads
as has been suggested,
it was a recommendation made eight years ago
that was acknowledged, revisited,
and still not seriously acted upon.
More fundamentally, straight tracks are not the golden
solution that they're being portrayed to be.
Research conducted by an Australian university found
that while straight tracks may reduce the number
of on track fatalities and serious injuries,
overall the injury rates remain high.
This matters in the context of the Annual Welfare Act.
Reducing the most serious extreme outcomes does not equate
to compliance with minimum annual welfare standards.
The act requires animals
to be free from an unnecessary suffering.
Greyhound racing, whether it occurs on a straight track
or an oval track, still involves dog sprinting at extreme
speeds, risking their wellbeing
for entertainment and gambling.
The suffering remains foreseeable, avoidable,
and unnecessary when New Zealand
enacted the Animal Welfare Act. Excuse
Emily. Sorry,
I'm gonna have
to interrupt you there 'cause we've reached time.
That that's fine. But thank you very much for your, um,
passionate words and for appearing
before the committee this afternoon.
Thanks. Thank you.
Um, Jennifer Stone.
Hi Jennifer. You may have your, oh yes, sounds on.
Hi, your camera's not on.
Hi, we can't see you,
so if you wanna flick your camera on
go. Yep, yep, that's it.
Good day. Hi. Hi.
We've got five minutes, which seems
to be going incredibly quickly,
so if you wanna give us a chance to ask a couple
of questions, which I'm sure we would, that would be great.
But, um, yes, the floor's yours.
Yeah, uh, it takes me about four minutes to run
through what I'm going to say.
So, uh, thanks for having me here today.
I strongly support the proposed ban to pro, sorry,
the proposed bill to ban Greyhound racing in New Zealand.
Over the last year, I've joined members of Freedom of
for the Animals NZ
and attending the Auckland Greyhound Racetrack to protest
and film how the dogs are treated
and have unfortunately seen many injuries
falls and rough handling.
It's really hard to see these dogs are very trusting
and try their very best to please their trainers,
yet they suffer so badly.
As you'll be aware, there were over 800 injuries in 17
deaths in the racing season, ending 31 July 25.
Sadly, we know the official industry statistics only include
race day injuries and deaths
and not those that occur during training.
So the true numbers are indeed higher.
We've seen many injured dogs walked off,
particularly in the last two months
where it seems the handlers are increasingly reluctant
to use the rescue cart.
And we've been verbally abused for filming injured dogs.
This shows they are not putting the dog's welfare first.
Most recently on Sunday the 3rd of January 26th,
mega Power let out an awful Yelp early on in a long race.
Yet no one tried to stop him from running another lap.
Unsurprisingly, he came in last while off the rest
of the field, the handler healed abuse at one of us
for filming and then proceeded
to walk the dog off again as a yelp and pain.
The subsequent vet examination revealed a torn graceless
muscle in their leg,
and they were received a 42 day incapacitation
Sunday, the 28th of December, 2025, uh,
which you've heard about earlier.
However, um, that was the most difficult day for me as, uh,
we were there and witnessed a fall at the Lure
where a young dog called Epic Pearl broke her leg
and was euthanized soon after.
All we could do was document her last day
alive, her last race.
One of our activists heard the handler say, cover me
to a fellow handler.
And we watched as all the others gathered around her
until the cart arrived.
Pearl deserved comfort
and for her welfare to be prioritized above all else.
At this time, this is not what the actions
of these people demonstrated at the age
of just two years old, Pearl had won that race,
but she'd lost her life.
And this is a photo of Pearl.
Uh, not sure how well you can see that,
but the blue arrow is pointing to her.
It's where she falls. It's where she fell at the lure,
broke her leg, and then here she is being
carted away at her last race.
And Pearl's just one of so many dogs over the years.
I don't see how this industry can be safely
regulated for these dogs.
In the last decade through reviews,
including the 2021 Robertson Review have found ongoing
problems to such an extent
that the greyhound racing industry in New Zealand has indeed
lost its social license.
Despite years of promises to improve these problems persist.
This shows that welfare risks cannot be resolved
through better regulation or oversight alone.
A ban is the only way
to protect these greyhounds from preventable suffering.
It reflects the expectations of the New Zealand public
and aligns with our country's reputation
as a leader in animal welfare.
I urge the government to pass this bill
and end the unnecessary suffering of these dogs
by closing the industry on the 1st of August, 2026.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Jennifer. That's much appreciated.
Um, oh, Steve, we have a question from you.
Yeah, just a quick one. Thank you, Jennifer.
Um, have you seen in the time you've been at the, uh,
dog races, um,
any improvements in the welfare approach in that time?
Well, as I say, I have only been there
just over a year now.
Oh yeah. Okay. So I haven't, no, I really haven't.
Okay. No, thank you.
If, if anything,
as I say the last few months it's been worse
because, uh, we are noticing them walking and dogs off.
So it's, it's not encouraging.
Okay. Thank you.
Um, thank you very much
Jennifer. Thanks for your time today.
Thank you Tes.
Um, okay, we now, sorry Steve,
I thought you had your hand up again.
We now have Ian Collins on Zoom for five minutes. Hi Ian.
Hello. Can you hear Me? Applause yours?
Yes. Um, a lot
of the things I was gonna say today are actually being said
more eloquently by, um, many of the earlier,
um, submitters.
But one little point I would like to make is
we talk about the welfare and the rehoming
and the funding of the rehoming.
Now, realistically, given that greyhounds live to 15,
sometimes funding is gonna have to be available until 2040
to actually, you know, to maintain the same standard
of whole life care that Greyhounds currently enjoy.
So I'll just want me to lead on with that.
Um, I, I have, um, three greyhounds, one
dev raced, he chose not to,
and two greyhounds, which best described
as special needs dogs
because, um, they are spooks,
which are like an autistic dog.
Um, one of which was actually brought out
to me direct from his trainer
because they were so concerned he would, um,
shut down in any other kind of environment.
So that just shows that the dedication, you know,
the trainer wouldn't even want the dog to go
through a rehoming kennel
'cause they were so concerned for his welfare.
I've ended up adopting both of them
because, well, I'm, I'm soft
and I didn't want to see them fail
when they went to adoption.
Um, yeah, so that's, that's my background.
I've, I fostered probably, I don't know, getting on
for 20 dogs over the time for, um, rehoming groups.
So I've seen lots of dogs come through.
I know that their welfare.
So the other point I would like to address is,
or one of the other points was the survey
that the SPCA mentions,
and I know someone here asked what the data was.
And, and very interesting fact from
that survey is a mere 3% of the people, um,
surveyed, said,
I know a lot about commercial
greyhound racing in New Zealand.
The other 97% knew little or nothing about it.
So as an engineer and who lives by maths
and stats, that doesn't seem like a very good way to base,
you know, uh, gauge public opinion and form legislation.
Um, I forgot to stop my timer,
so can you gimme a nudge when I get near the end?
Yeah, we've got a couple of minutes.
It goes very quickly, so, yeah,
I know, I know. And it's hard to
actually up with it.
And the other one other point I wanna make about the, some
of the submitters, uh, in favor
of the bill is the continual reference to multiple reports.
They all say there's been multiple reports,
but they never, ever say that the recommendations
that came out of the final Robertson report
have all been met.
And that is one of the, the key points which the minister
chooses to ignore is, you know, the, uh, RRIB report
that came out in November, 2024
before the announcement had the clear,
as the RRIB chaps mentioned this morning,
had everything marked as satisfactory.
So reference to those reports is, is fairly meaningless
because the reports made recommendations
and the recommendations, you know, GNZ put the effort
and the money into meeting their goals set by those reports.
So, you know,
and my final point hopefully is I
consider the bill highly unjust because of the comp.
The greyhound racing has the best welfare standards outta
all three codes, and yet the, the minister
and our friends of the SPCA seem perfectly happy
with the welfare standards of, um, horse racing.
It's interesting, the SPCA never
questioned the welfare standards of horse racing,
but they're happy to bash greyhound racing,
which has the higher welfare standards.
I think I'll stop there before I get carried away,
if anyone has any, any questions,
otherwise I could talk for an hour.
The, we've actually reached time now.
Ian, thank you very much for your,
we could tell you could talk for an hour,
you're very knowledgeable about your industry,
but, um, yeah, thank you very much
for your time this afternoon.
Um, we have Lynette Butler.
Hello. Sorry, I, hi. Just lost your screen. There we go.
Kira. Um, thank you very much for listening, uh,
for having me speak.
You're welcome. And you, you've got five minutes
and it goes very quickly, so if you wanna allow some time
for questions, which I'm sure the members would enjoy, um,
just, yeah, that'd be great. Excellent.
Okay, so thank you. I oppose the ban on Greyhound racing,
not because I oppose animal welfare reform, but
because I support reform that is consistent,
evident based and effective.
I grew up in the Greyhound community.
My experience wasn't from a distance,
it was part of everyday life.
I was too young to work on the track itself,
but I did the chores at home, working with the dogs,
taking care of the dogs,
and seeing how they were handled from day to day.
What I saw was not cruelty.
I saw routine structure attachment
and dogs were calm, affectionate,
and clearly engaged in what they were bred to do.
Greyhounds thrive on consistency, attention and running,
and that lived reality is largely missing
from the public conversation.
My concern is not
that greyhound racing should be exempt from Cru scrutiny.
My concern is that it's been judged in isolation.
While other working dog sectors with comparable
or higher levels of injury risk are not required to collect,
uh, and publish equivalent data.
Greyhound racing is the only working dog sector
with mandatory injury reporting veterinary oversight at
every event, public welfare reporting,
traceability requirements,
and external regulatory regulation,
transparency has effectively become the reason
this industry is being singled out.
Historically, wastage was the industry's greatest
welfare failure.
That criticism was valid at the time,
but is no longer accurate.
Rehoming programs are now widespread, well-resourced
and successful.
Traceability has tightened
and outcomes for retired dogs have changed.
Fundamentally, policy should recognize improvement not
freeze in industry in its past.
There is also a wider regulatory risk
and the approach being taken if the most transparent
sector is eliminated.
The lesson for every other sector is clear.
Do not measure, do not publish, do not invite scrutiny.
That is the opposite of good welfare, animal welfare policy.
If further improvement is required,
there are proportion options available.
These include independent audits,
consistent reporting across all working dog sectors,
strength and re-homing support, refined racing limits,
and national cross sector welfare standards.
These measures would protect dogs without dismantling a
regulated community that has demonstrated
responded to reform.
Reform. A total ban is a total,
is the strongest regulatory tool available.
It should be reserved for situations
where regulation has clearly failed.
In this case, regulation has worked
and continues to work a respectfully our committee
to reconsider a blanket ban
and instead pursue a consistent cross-sector evidence-based
approach to working dog welfare. Thank you.
Thank you so much Nette,
and thank you for allowing us a minute or so for questions.
We have a question from Cameron Luxton, uh, thank you Chief
and also Steve Abel.
So quick, quick. Yep.
Sure. Thank you Lynette.
Um, you, you seem like, uh,
a woman who's across the statistics
and the, um, the data here.
So I just wanted to run something by you.
We've had a, the committee's heard from some, uh,
some submitters that there's been 800 plus injuries
and 17 deaths last year,
and all of this are race day statistics.
Is that accurate? Are those all race day statistics?
I'm not in the industry now. Okay.
Um, I, I grew up in the industry, um,
and when I left home, that was my time in
the Greyhound world finished.
Okay, perfect. Um, my parents carried on
for a little bit longer, but yeah, things moved on.
Um, so I'm not gonna quote on today's,
that's why I've kept completely out of
that from my surface looking into it.
Oh, wee bit more than surface.
Um, but, you know, my digging into it, it seems to me that
they've done everything they've been asked to do
to improve the situation,
and that was the outcome of far bigger
scrutiny than what I'm gonna give it.
But what I do know is, I mean,
I I'm not talking about being a young,
a two young person to know what was going on.
Um, I was not 18, so I couldn't be a race handler.
Um, but the dogs,
occasionally dogs got injured,
but it wasn't an everyday, um, catastrophic event.
It, the, the injuries were often, well, the ones I recall,
and we are going back a few years,
were minor and dealt with.
What I see in the industry now is these are being
properly vet checked while still at the race course.
Um, there's a lot more exposure to a dog is injured.
What are you doing to bring that dog back fairly?
I can only see that this has improved,
and yet it wasn't, it didn't appear
to be a massive issue at the time.
So I think what I took from
that is it's something has improved significantly.
And that's all that's been asked of it.
Thank you so much for your
time, Lynette. It's much appreciated.
Thank you. Um,
we now have Stacey McCarthy.
Hi Stacey. Hi.
So we've you've got five minutes too, so, okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Hi,
and thank you very much for this opportunity to speak today.
My name is Stacey McCarthy
and I strongly oppose the bill
to ban Greyhound racing in New Zealand.
I'm not just here as someone involved in the Greyhound,
greyhound industry, but also someone who genuinely cares
and loves about these dogs and their wellbeing.
I own greyhounds. I'm a handler on race days,
I suppose a kennel hand in my spare time.
And I'm also a bed board member at the Auckland
Greyhound Racing Club.
This proposed ban is not just a policy change,
it'll have profound human
and animal consequences
that I don't believe have been fully acknowledged.
Firstly, I want to talk about the mental health impact
on industry participants.
Behind every greyhound are people such as trainers, kennel,
hands, breeders, and vets, many whom live in regional areas
and have built their lives around this industry.
For them, this band represents not only job loss,
but loss of identity, purpose,
and community Participants already operate under intense
scrutiny and public criticism, being told overnight
that the work you've dedicated your life to is unacceptable
and deeply distressing.
For some, this industry is a family tradition
that dates back generations.
The stress, anxiety, and uncertainty this band creates
cannot be understated.
We are already seeing people fearful for their futures,
their livelihoods and mental wellbeing.
Any policy decision of this magnitude should at the very
least, acknowledge and address the human cost.
And right now that feels absent.
Communication to us from Minister Peters is non-existent.
His communication regarding the ban has been public
and media based with him defending the decision rather than
engaging in direct communication.
Where is their inquiry? We were promised.
How about a referendum?
That way every New Zealander have the opportunity
to see the facts for themselves rather than relying
on misinformation.
I bet 90% of New Zealand don't even know we exist.
Don't ban an industry
because a handful of people
believe it's the right thing to do.
Secondly, the economic and business impact.
Greyhound racing supports a wide ecosystem
of legitimate businesses.
Trainers, feed supplier, vets,
contractors, hospitality workers.
Many of these are small, small businesses
with very small margins.
A band doesn't just shut down racing.
That collapses an entire supply chain,
particularly in regional New Zealand
where alternative employment is very limited.
These are not easily transferable skills
and many participants are older and highly specialized.
Compensation and transition plans are very
vague and insufficient.
For many, this band represents financial
ruin, not a transition.
Finally, and most importantly,
I wanna talk about the welfare of our dogs.
I love these dogs. They're not disposable commodities to us.
They're handled several times a day, monitored closely
and given exceptional vet care.
Greyhounds are the most traceable dogs in New Zealand.
Every dog is registered tracked
and accountable from birth until retirement.
This level of traceability is stronger than
what exists under the equine codes.
Yet those industries are not facing a ban like we are.
If racing is banned, hundreds of dogs will need
to be re-homed in a very short space of time.
Re-homing systems while well intentioned,
are not currently resourced for that scale.
Flooding the re-homing pipeline risks poorer outcomes
for the dogs that this very ban claims to protect.
There is also a real risk that the dogs will fall
through the cracks due to the industry being shut down.
So abruptly regulation allows oversight bans remove that.
Our welfare standards keep our dogs visible,
accountable, and protected.
A ban will only make you feel like you've solved your
socalled political issues,
but it will make the outcomes for our precious dogs worse.
I'm not asking you to ignore welfare concerns.
I'm asking you whether you consider
that a ban is the best path forward.
Please consider the mental health of us people,
the economic impact on communities
and the real world welfare outcomes
for the dogs we all care about.
Our dogs are loved and well cared for.
With our strong regulations, transparency,
and continued reform, their welfare can continue
to improve without destroying lives
and livelihoods in the process.
Humanity and welfare count us and our dogs count you.
The select committee will hold a place in history, whether
that be the overturn of the ban
or the extinction of the greyhound breed in New Zealand.
I urge you not to shrink from your responsibility.
We are not sinners. We are good people and we love our dogs.
Thank you. Thank you so much, Stacy.
That was a very heartfelt compassion speech. Thank you.
Any questions? Um, we are actually at time. Okay.
Thank you for your time. Thank you. No, thank you.
We now have Kevin Wick via Zoom.
Oh, Kevin, if you can hear me,
can you please accept the invitation
from Yep, that worked.
Can you hear us, Kevin? Alright.
You just need to turn your mute. Yeah, turn your sound on.
Perfect. And you can turn your camera on
if you like, but you don't have
to. Perfect.
Hey. Hello. Welcome. You had
Five minutes. It goes very quickly.
I'll go through quickly. Uh,
my submission was more on the lines of everyone else,
but I've got a proposal for the day, uh, a proposal,
how we change Greyhound racing to be safer, to be better.
Straight tracks have been mentioned a lot over the course
of the two days here.
Let's go one step further. Let's run in lanes.
What would a perspec screen go down the track so
that eliminates not, uh, contact injuries.
So yeah, again,
and then again, so you would have all lure arm
with eight lures on it.
That would eliminate the injuries when it comes
to the big pileup at the end,
because they're all chasing their own lure.
I, I think we've got
to rethink the way we do the greyhound racing.
I'm thinking that perhaps I'm, I'm old enough
to remember when Team 20 Cricket come out
and, um, everyone panned it
and went yuck and, uh, never last.
Now it's the best thing in cricket.
Let's rethink the way we do the greyhound racing.
Let's do short track racing.
If we go down to one 50, then we could utilize the tracks
that we have, get rid of the corners.
We've got 100, 150 meters of straight track.
That would be something that would be exciting.
And then again, um, say with moving this one, this is a bit
of a bit of a curve ball.
I was watching Crufts and, uh, Crufts had the fly ball
and everyone loves when the Greyhound comes to the fly ball
because it, it's so graceful, it's so speedy, it's whatever.
And if we've got these 150 meter tracks,
we could almost, I say stay with me.
This is way out there. We can have pears racing.
We can have one greyhound going one way,
one greyhound going the other way.
And I'm thinking on the fly ball when they cross that
end line and the new Greyhound has to
literally within milliseconds cross the line again.
Would that not be exciting for the punters?
We need to get the punters excited in
great hand racing again.
Let's get the revenues going back.
I, I I can see what you're saying. You know. Yeah.
I'm a little bit thinking way out the box here,
but I think we've got to perhaps change it
and tweak it that we, it's gotta be safer
for the Greyhound to run solo.
They're, they're not trained
to run against another Greyhound.
They're trained to run against a lure.
They have no idea what's going on around them.
There are solo trials.
There's even been solo races
where it's all against the clock.
The Greyhound wants to run the lure
and it will on a straight track, it will go straight down.
It won't worry what's next to it.
And I say that that eliminates all contact injuries.
A lot of contact injuries where they crashing
with each other and they wash stride
and get on heels and things like that.
And again, if you had a single lure for a single dog,
you haven't got the big part.
Again, eliminating more injuries.
I know that's a bit of a, I've sort,
Winston really wants to lose old racing.
Let's have new greyhound racing.
Give my license for new greyhound racing.
Let's rethink the whole thing. Let's make it safer.
Let's make it, let's get the punters back.
Enjoying racing again.
Be that short track racing one 50, all sorts of things.
Sorry, that was a bit ble, but, um, that's it. Thank you.
No, that was a great stream of consciousness. You're fine.
You it was fantastic. Innovation. Innovation.
Thank you for Kevin.
Unfortunately, we are out of time,
but um, no, we do appreciate,
thank you very much for
joining the committee this afternoon.
Do it. No problem. Thank you. Bye now.
Bye.
Right. Kelly, bold.
Oh hi
Tina Coco Nui for the opportunity
to speak today called Kelly Bold, a member
of the Greyhound Protection League,
a grassroots organization that has been calling for the end
of Greyhound racing since 2009.
I want to clearly say at the outset that we love greyhounds.
We are all guardians of hounds from the industry.
I love three so far,
and some of my experiences are in my written
submissions, which you will have read.
We unequivocally support this bill
to ban Greyhound racing in ULT on 31 July, 2026.
I do want to acknowledge that the industry has made some
changes, but it's important
to be honest about the context in which
those changes have occurred.
The WHK report in 2013, the Hanson review report in 2017
and the Robertson Review in 2021,
all found the same persistent
and systemic animal welfare failures including unacceptably,
high injury and death rates, data integrity
and transparency issues.
Crucially, these reports also show
that reforms have been reactive, not proactive.
Change has occurred only after intense public
and advocacy scrutiny, media retention,
and sustained regulatory pressure not
through genuine industry lead commitment
to welfare of the greyhounds.
And as the great Maya Angelou said, when people show you
who they are, believe them.
The evidence I will now share today is not, uh,
historic cases, but drawn from race day reports
and racing integrity board decisions.
And they are just as fraction of the cases
and the most serious that have been
before the RAB since the industry was formally put on notice
on two September, 2021 taken together.
They show how the harm to greyhounds occurs in repeatable
patterns under a system
that prioritizes profit over welfare.
Since 2021, at least seven greyhounds have tested positive
for methamphetamine and amphetamine across multiple trainers
and multiple regions.
In the most recent case in December last year,
the RAB imposed no penalty.
Instead accepting the trainer's explanations.
They had no idea how the hound Hilton
hustle tested positive.
In this same period, more than a dozen greyhounds have
tested positive for other prohibited substances,
some performance enhancing.
One example is the hound Grandview Ace, who tested positive
for cobalt after his trainer readily admitted administering
uncontrolled doses of a horse supplement.
We've also seen repeated cases
of arsenic at high levels from dogs excessively chewing
or licking treated timber in their kennels.
And some cases entire kennel structures would chew
through signaling a failure
of basic housing enrichment and welfare.
The Hound Jetson singer was found
during a routine kennel audit
by the RIB on her trainer's bathroom floor.
After whelping, a litter of puppies,
she had multiple full thickness wounds to her hip and leg.
Her trainer acknowledged the wounds were loosening.
He had never sought veterinary care for her.
Instead giving her human antibiotics
based on the severity of her condition.
She was euthanized impressive.
Ila was examined after a poor race performance,
prescribed pain relief and given a 42 day stand down
weeks later, her condition had deteriorated significantly
with x-rays revealing bone cancer.
She was immediately euthanized due to her pain.
Subsequent urine testing showed zero trace
of pain medicine in her system.
Almost every day, race dogs are scratched
after turning up to the track already carrying injuries two
of the worst, a homebush hero
and Val, both
of whom arrived at the track in separate incidents
with severe tail wounds involving dead tissue
and exposed bone wrapped up in tape in Val Jewel's case.
No one had looked at her tail in three days
and her trainer described it as a small issue
and a small oversight.
These are failures of the most basic
veterinary care and welfare.
We've also seen repeated cases of greyhounds recorded
as privately rehomed,
but with no verifiable evidence of this,
including two hounds just last week.
No full names, no working contact details,
no follow up possible.
We don't even know if those dogs ever left their trainer's
properties or if they're alive or dead.
If the current system were working, we would not continue
to see the same patterns
of preventable harm involving the same kind of breaches.
And in many cases, the same individuals years
after repeated industry reviews.
In most cases, the trainers involved in these incidents
remain active participants in the industry today.
Some have spoken to you during these two days of hearings.
In the case of Val Jewel,
they're a current GZ Board member who spoke this morning.
I want to quickly address the claim
that if Greyhound racing ends, the breed will go extinct.
Greyhounds have existed for thousands of years,
first appearing in ancient Egyptian art
and referenced in the Bible.
Greyhound racing in contrast, is a modern invention
with the mechanical lure only painted in 1912.
Ending commercial greyhound racing does not end the breed,
it simply ends the exploitation.
We commend members across the house
who are putting greyhounds and animal welfare first
and helping to claim New Zealand's reputation
as a world leader in the space.
Now Nui,
Thank you very much Kelly.
We've for each time, but thank you
very much for your submission.
It's much appreciated. Thanks. Okay.
Um, we now have Mark Jackman.
K Hi,
The Floor is yours.
Thank you. Thanks for giving me five minutes of your time.
Uh, I'm sure you've heard a lot of damning data today,
like we've just listened now.
So I'll focus mainly on our Greyhound stories.
So five years ago, my partner
and I were looking to adopt a dog
and a bit by chance we stumbled up, uh,
across Greyhounds online.
We then decided to adopt APA
and we quickly fell in love with the breed.
Now APA was almost five years old when he
arrived at our house.
He didn't know h what a house was.
We had to tape trips across our glass doors
because he kept running into them.
He'd spent his entire life in kennels conditioned
for just one purpose to chase.
A few months later we adopted bag
and she came to us scarred.
Literally while in the humming panels,
another Greyhound managed
to remove their muscle and attack her.
DNI couldn't defend herself
because she still has her muscle.
She requires surgery
and still carries large cars on her chest and shoulders.
She is also missing a significant portion of her tongue.
When we asked the adoption agency about it,
no one had ever even noticed
the medical records didn't mention it.
And yet we noticed within the first day,
this is just one example of things
that happened of the truck.
Both of our dogs have very strong prey, drives years
of conditioning to chase can simply be undone.
Despite working with professional trainers,
the recall has never reached a point
where they could safely be off leash in busy
dog parks or beaches.
And yet the irony crawl, GRNZ argues
that greyhounds love to run
and deserve the opportunity to do so.
Yet once discarded by the trainers,
most greyhounds rarely get that chance.
Their prey drive, deliberately train
and reinforce for years makes it unsafe.
By contrast, many pet bred side hounds like whippets
and hopefully in the future,
greyhounds will while sharing the same instinct,
haven't undergone that intensive conditioning
and can often be trained for safer off-leash runs.
My partner and I have got it up at the crack of dawn
to take them to deserted beaches
and even rented private spaces for our dogs to run.
But understandably, this isn't something every dog
owner is able to do.
These dogs were bred to run yet once they rehomed, most,
most rarely get to.
And APA and DNI are among the lucky ones.
They came from small trainers,
which we believe genuinely cared for them.
But we've met dozen of other greyhounds are one.
So fortunate dogs carrying deep trauma, unable
to socialize even with other greyhounds.
Many from trainers managing over a hundred
or 150 dogs treated as commodities.
I'm sure by now you've heard of the Hanson reports
and how over 2,500 greyhounds were ized or young accounted
or between 2013 and 2017.
And that 77% of trainers admitted
to utilizing healthy greyhounds.
That was less than 10 years ago.
And many of those trainers are still operating today.
Between 2020
and 2025, there were 4,300 reported injuries
and more than 580 greyhounds killed.
The euthanasia policy wasn't introduced until 2022.
And it's not that trainers suddenly started
caring for greyhounds.
They, most of them were just forced to pretend to care.
And thankfully, this is part of a global reckoning.
Whale is banning Han Racing.
Scotland is banning in Tasmania, is facing it out.
Even in England. Tracks are closing
because people aren't showing up anymore.
The industry is collapsing
because societies are recognizing what it truly is.
Systemic animal exploitation dressed up as sport up
and d life because they got out,
but they'll never be the dogs they could have been if they
not been born into this industry.
Greyhound racing cannot be reforming to something humane.
It relies on injury wastage and disposability.
Please don't let the next generation
of Greyhound rely on lock.
Thank you very much for listening to me, mahi.
Thank you very much for your time, mark.
Unfortunately we've reached time so we don't, uh,
not able to have any questions.
But thank you very much for
appearing before the committee today.
Thank you Kiara.
Sure you have five minutes.
Uh, ki members of the city committee
and thank you for the opportunity to speak.
Um, my name is Ki and I strongly support the band
for Greyhound Racing Hotel in New Zealand.
My family and I live with Sharky, a gentle kindhearted
and deeply trusting 8-year-old retired greyhound.
We consider him our first child.
So much so that our 2-year-old
daughter calls him Shaki brother.
Having shaki has changed how I understand this issue
because it makes one thing very clear.
Greyhounds are not sporting equipment, not commodities
and not disposable assets.
They are sensitive social and center animals
because of that, this issue is not primarily about
regulation compliance or industry reform.
That is a moral question about what we are prepared
to justify in the pursuit of profit and entertainment.
Greyhound racing exists solely
for human entertainment and gambling.
It is not necessary
and that it does not exist
for the benefit of animals themselves.
This physical and psychological risks are born entirely
by the greyhounds with a financial rewards flow elsewhere.
Greyhounds cannot consent to racing.
They cannot refuse to participate,
and they cannot withdraw when injured,
distressed, or exhausted.
When an activity depends on animals absorbing harm so
that others can profit the ethical legitimacy
of their activity must be questioned.
It is often claimed that greyhounds love racing.
Greyhounds do have a natural instinct, instinct to chase,
but instinct is not a measure of wellbeing.
Behavior in racing environments is shaped
through conditioning and reinforcement.
In highly controlled settings,
visible excitement should not be mistaken for choice,
safety, or even welfare.
Alongside being a caregiver to a Greyhound, I've worked
for over a decade as an athletic performance coach,
trained high performance athletes across multiple sports.
I'm currently completing my PhD in human performance
and my professional practice is governed
by formal education, accreditation, ethical standards,
and human high performance.
Sport practitioners are typically required
to hold advanced university qualifications
after the master's degree or above,
and to maintain accreditation
through ongoing professional development
and adherence to evidence-based practice.
This framework exists
to manage the risk and protect wellbeing.
As a coach, I cannot force an athlete to compete.
I cannot force, I cannot compel participation when
someone is injured or unwell.
I cannot knowingly expose an athlete to unacceptable risk.
If I did, there would be professional consequences.
By contrast, in the greyhound racing industry,
individuals can be responsible
for training high performance racing dogs
after completing short
competency-based vocational qualifications.
These qualifications teach predefined tasks for immediate
industry entry, but do not involve research training,
advanced critical analysis or equivalent ethical oversight.
This is not a, a criticism of vocational education.
Certificates serve an important purpose.
The issue is proportionately
between responsibility and safeguards.
This is where comparison between human sport
and greyhound racing fail.
Human athletes have agency legal protections
and the ability to step away.
Greyhounds do not. Training alone does not make an activity.
Ethical. Ethical legitimacy comes from accountability,
oversight, and respect for the welfare
of the individual being trained.
Though safeguards exist in human sport,
they do not exist at the same standard of greyhound racing.
It is also commonly said
that greyhounds are treated like family.
Family implies care
that continues when it becomes inconvenient or costly.
In practice, many greyhounds have raced while injured,
drugged, and euthanized when no longer
competitive or discarded.
When rehoming is difficult,
these outcomes sit uneasily alongside claims of family care.
Oh, thank you very much. Kiran is, excuse, is it?
Are you still going? Did your Yeah.
Yeah. Sorry. Okay, carry on.
Sorry, it just froze briefly.
Oh, no worries. What Fantastic.
Um, the fact that these issues recur over decades suggests
they are systemic, not isolated.
This points to a fundamental conflict between animal welfare
and the structure of the industry itself.
More broadly, there's a growing recognition internationally
that animals are more than property.
Animals are sentient, vulnerable, and capable of suffering.
Once greyhounds are rehomed, we do not treat them
as property in any meaningful sense.
They share our homes, our routines, our lives,
and in many cases, even our last name, we act
as caregivers and guardians, not owners.
Children are dependent on adults that do not regard them
as property dependence increases responsibility,
but it does not diminish their moral worth.
Animals like children as sentient and vulnerable.
And it is precisely why they deserve protection.
I think you've frozen again, Karen,
but um, unfortunately we've also reached time,
so we'll have to stop it there.
But thank you very much for your time and for appearing
before the committee this afternoon.
No worries. Thank you. Thanks, Kira. David?
Oh, Steve, did you have a question? No.
Okay. We're good. Hi, David.
Welcome to the primary Production Select Committee.
Yep. Hello. Can you hear me?
We can hear you. You have five minutes,
and if you want to give us a chance to ask you a couple
of questions, just please keep your inter
introductory remarks to a minimum
so we have some time at the end. Thank you very much.
Okay. My name's David Kingston.
I'm a Greyhound trainer, uh, age 76 from ACE Burton.
Um, right at the moment, I'm entering my 59th year
as a Greyhound trainer.
Wow. My family had over 300 years collectively
of involvement in administration, training, breeding,
everything to do with greyhound racing.
Now, I want to just bring, uh, the panel's attention
to the Department of the Prime Minister
and Cabinets conduct public duty and personal interests.
Um, sheet 2.56 and all of these roles,
and at all times, ministers are expected to act lawfully
and behave in a way that upholds
and is seen to uphold the highest ethical
and behavioral standards.
This includes exercising a professional approach
and good judgment in their interactions
with the public staff and officials
and in all their communications, personal and professional.
Ultimately, all ministers are accountable
to the Prime Minister for their behavior.
While we've had no communication from their minister at all.
Now, I find this absolutely unfair and unjust.
The second part is identifying conflicts
of interest in category 2.63.
A conflict of interest may be pecuniary
that is arising from the minister's direct financial
interests or non pecuniary concerning, for example,
a member of the minister's family.
A conflict of interest may be direct or indirect.
Ministers must consider all types
of interest when assessing whether any
of their personal interests may conflict with
or be perceived to conflict
with their ministerial responsibilities.
Well, panel our racing minister is there
to represent the three codes.
He's also a thoroughbred owner who is going
to be the direct beneficiary of this bill.
Now, I find that totally, totally unacceptable,
totally acceptable.
Though we talk about deaths and injuries.
The SPCA
and the Minister have both publicly stated
that they have no intention
of pursuing a ban on the two horse racing codes,
and even human deaths
and major injuries are of no concern to Winston,
as he has publicly stated.
The horse codes are safe from a ban. Is that fair?
And just this ban is not about our beloved greyhounds,
but is driven by pure greed.
He being a horse owner could also benefit
financially by this decision.
Is this fair? No.
Now, like, like I said, my family, I, I'm in,
I'm in the 60th year of training.
We love our greyhounds.
I won my first race when I was 17 years old, and I got $3.
To me, it's never ever been about the money.
It's been about the love of the dog.
Now, you've heard from so many people today, vets, God knows
what, good trainers, bad trainers, the public,
they all love the greyhounds.
You know, we've got the best welfare, uh,
code in the world for animals.
Certainly the best in New Zealand.
How is it fair and just that you ban
a 169 million
or $160 million industry in New Zealand
and still want to import Greyhound racing from Australia?
This is just so hypocritical.
I have written to most of the, uh, political parties.
The only ones that have written back to me is the Act Party.
I've tried to get through to James Meger,
our own MP down in Ash.
Burton can't even get an interview with him,
but I did get a letter from his secretary saying that, um,
he accepted that there's been some, um,
wrongdoings in the way this was brought about.
But no way is the ban going to be overturned.
That's his word. Now.
We can't even get to our own politicians.
We can't get any response from the minister
as a board member on the on Greyhound racing New Zealand.
And as a board member of Greyhound's Australasia,
I find this just absolutely unacceptable.
That's all I've got to say.
Thank you so much, David,
and thank you for your commitment to the industry
and also for your, um, refreshingly honest submission
and offering a slightly different perspective
what we've heard previously.
But, um, yeah, no, we really
appreciate your time. Thank you.
Thank you. Okay.
We have Alan Bryce for 10 minutes via Zoom.
Oh, Alan, sorry, my thing says zoom. Is it?
I'm gonna get that wrong. Oh,
I was expecting to be on it.
Five 20,
Huh?
Sorry, I was expecting to be on at five 20.
Is my watch wrong? Nevermind.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to talk to you.
Um, I've been a veterinarian for 50 years.
Most of that time I've worked for, um,
primary industry departments in different states
and for the Commonwealth in, uh, Australia
and, uh, in New Zealand for math and,
and D-P-I-M-P-I rather, um,
I've worked on animal welfare standards.
Um, I've been, uh, part of, uh,
national committees on animal welfare,
particularly in Australia.
Um, I've been an expert witness in court cases, uh, dealing
with, uh, animal cruelty.
Um, I've been the independent chair
of Greyhound Racing New Zealand's Animal Health
and Welfare Committee for three years.
Uh, the role of the Animal Health
and Welfare Committee of GRNZ is to advance the care
and wellbeing of racing greyhounds in New Zealand.
I don't represent GRNZ.
I'm an independent, um, consultant.
And, uh, my role on the committee is
as an the independent chair.
I'm very proud of the achievements of, uh, the Animal Health
and Welfare Committee and providing advice to GRNZ over
that three year period.
And even before, uh, I,
before the time that I was chair,
when I became the chair, I met with the board.
I told them that I was not prepared to do the job
unless, uh, animal health, uh, sorry, animal welfare was,
uh, central to all the decisions that, uh, that the board
of GRNZ made.
And they gave me a commitment that they,
that would be how it would work.
And I have seen no evidence that they've, they've, uh,
departed from that agreement.
Over the three years, uh,
I've seen GRNZ prioritize animal welfare at all times.
There's been three reviews into the industry.
As you know, the first two were
commissioned by the industry.
And the third one, the Robertson Review in 20 20 21, uh,
was commissioned by the government.
Each of those highlighted issues with the industry
and the, in each case, the industry responded to the issues
that were, that were identified.
The decision to ban the industry seems to have been based,
uh, on the 2021 review findings with no recognition
of the progress made by industry.
Since the Robertson Review was published, uh,
there's been no contact between the minister
and GRNZ over that period.
Um, my sub in my written submission,
you'll find I list 23 initiatives
that have been implemented since 2021
to improve Grey Ann Welfare.
For example, race fatalities have been reduced by 85%,
and unnecessary euthanasia have been reduced to zero,
and that zero has been for several years.
Um, the previous government placed the industry on notice,
as we all know.